Osteoporosis International (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
ABSTRACT
World Congress on Osteoporosis, Osteoarthritis and Musculoskeletal
Diseases (WCO-IOF-ESCEO 2021): Poster Abstracts
P101
OSTEOPOROTIC VERTEBRAL COMPRESSION FRACTURE:
USE OF SUBLAMINAR MERSILENE TAPE AUGMENTED
PEDICLE SCREWS
G. Kakadiya1, K. Chaudhary2
1Topiwala National Medical College & BYL Nair Hospital, 2PD Hinduja
Hospital & Research Centre, Mumbai, India
Objective: To assess safety and efficacy of sublaminar mersilene tape
augmented pedicle screws fixation as a novel and low cost modality of
spinal instrumentation for osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures
treatment.
Methods: A retrospective study of 40 consecutive patients of the
osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures. All patients were operated
with open surgery with decompression, pedicle screw fixation, and
sublaminar mersilene tape augmentation. Clinical, functional, and
radiological outcomes were compared to describe the utility of
sublaminar mersilene tape augmented pedicle screws for the treatment
of osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures.
Results: Compete neurological improvement was noted in 38 patients
(Frankel Grade-D to Grade-E), two patients remain with Frankel Garde
D neurology. Significant improvement was noted in VAS (preoperative
7.90±0.60 to final follow-up 2.90±0.54) and ODI (preoperative 77.10
±6.96 to 21.30±6.70 at final follow-up). Significant improvement was
noted in local kyphosis angle (preoperative 22.14±2.60 to 10.40
±1.40 at postoperative) with a 10% loss of correction (2.5±0.90) at final
follow-up. There were no pseudoarthrosis and implant failure noted. No
iatrogenic dural or nerve injury. Superficial wound infection was noted in
two patients that was managed with debridement and antibiotics.
Conclusion: There is a high chance of implant failure in the osteoporotic
spine due to poor bone quality. Sublaminar mersilene tape augmented
pedicle screws fixation is a novel and low-cost modality for osteoporotic
vertebral compression fracture. It provides significant improvement in
clinical, radiological, and functional outcomes. It is an alternative option
for osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures fixation to avoid long
construct or cement related complications. A mersilene tape is radiolucent
material and does not affect postoperative MRI.
P102
EFFECT OF TERIPARATIDE VS. CALCITONIN ON SPINAL
FUSION IN OSTEOPOROSIS PATIENTS
G. Kakadiya1
1Topiwala National Medical College & BYL Nair Hospital, Mumbai,
India
Objective: Osteoporosis is a progressive metabolic bone disease that is
characterized by a decrease in bone mass and density. TLIF is
biomechanically a better technique for the treatment of degenerative
lumbar disease. Teriparatide (rPTH) is the only anabolic agent that has
been approved for the treatment of osteoporosis. The study aim was to
evaluate the efficacy of teriparatide for TLIF in osteoporotic women.
Methods: 94 osteoporotic patients underwent TLIF surgery for
degenerative lumbar spine disease. Patients were divided into two groups.
The calcitonin group (n=48) was administered nasal calcitonin (200 IU)
for 2 months. The teriparatide group (n=46) was injected subcutaneously
with teriparatide (20 ug/d) for 3-month cycles. Serial plain x-rays,
computed tomography, and BMD evaluations were performed. Fusion
rate, bony fusion duration, and T-score changes were evaluated. VAS and
ODI were evaluated.
Results: The teriparatide group showed earlier fusion than the calcitonin
group. The mean bone fusion period was 5.8±4.7 months in the
teriparatide group but 9.4±5.2 months in the calcitonin group. The bone
fusion rate in the teriparatide group was higher than that in the calcitonin
group at 5 months; however, there was no difference after 12 and 24
months surgery. Pain scores and ODI were not significantly different
between groups. BMD scores in the teriparatide group were significantly
improved compared with the calcitonin group 2 y after surgery.
Conclusion: There was no significant improvement in overall fusion rate
and clinical outcome in our patients after injection of teriparatide, but the
teriparatide group showed early bony union and highly improved BMD
scores.
P103
OSTEOPOROTIC BURST FRACTURE: OUTCOMES OF
THREE-COLUMN RECONSTRUCTION SURGERY
G. Kakadiya1
1Topiwala National Medical College & BYL Nair Hospital, Mumbai,
India
Objective: To evaluate a novel effective procedure utilizing three-
column reconstruction via a posterior approach with a technique that
utilizes an arthroscope to visualize the anterior surface of the dura during
decompression.
Methods: A prospective study. 80 Osteoporotic vertebral burst fracture
patients with similar demographic data, clinical parameters (visual analog
scale: VAS; Oswestry Disability Index: ODI; Frankel grade) and
radiological parameters (BMD, kyphosis) managed by three-column
reconstruction through single posterior approach surgery: pedicle screw
fixation, corpectomy, arthroscope assisted transpedicular decompression
and fusion (mesh cage + bone grafting). Preoperative data, postoperative
data, surgical variables and complications were recorded analysed.
Results: No significant differences in demographic data. Significant
improvement was noted in VAS (pre-operative, 7.90±0.60; final follow-
up 2.90±0.54) and ODI (preoperative, 77.10±6.96; final follow-up 21.30
±6.70). Neurological improvement was noted in 74 patients (Frankel
grade E) while six patients remained nonambulatory (Frankel grade C).
Significant improvement was noted in local kyphosis angle (preoperative,
22.14±2.60; postoperative, 10.40±1.40) with a 10% loss of correction
(2.5±0.90) at final follow-up. Implant failure in two patients and proximal
junctional failure in two patients managed with revision surgery. No
iatrogenic dural or nerve injury.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-021-06125-9
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: Osteoporotic burst fracture can be managed with single
posterior surgery, three-column reconstruction with mesh cage. It
provides a significant improvement in clinical, radiological and
functional outcomes. The arthroscope can improve a surgeon's operative
field and magnification thereby ensuring complete decompression
without injuring the dura or spinal cord.
P104
THE OBESITY PARADOX AND BONE LOSS
Y. Makhlouf1, M. Sellami1, S. Miladi1, A. Fazaa1, L. Souebni1, K.
Ouenniche1, S. Kassab1, S. Chekili1, L. Zakraoui1, K. Ben
Abdelghani1, A. Laatar1
1Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: Most of the available evidence supports a lower risk of
vertebral fracture in obese adults. This belief was partially suggested by
the positive correlation between BMD and BMI. This study aimed to
assess the association of BMI with BMD and to explore their relation
with age and gender.
Methods: This is a cross-sectional study including Tunisian patients
referred for an assessment of BMD through DXA. BMD was measured
using standard methods over the lumbar spine L1-L4, the total proximal
femur. The results were expressed as T-scores according to the WHO
definition. Patients were subgrouped according to age (≤50 and >50 y).
Association between BMD and age as well as BMI was also assessed
(G1: obese patients and G2: nonobese patients). The level of significance
was fixed for p<0.05.
Results: The study included 100 patients with a female predominance
(sex ratio=10.1). The mean age for women was 61.9±13 y [18-83] and the
mean age for men was 59.7±7.5 y [47-72]. The mean BMI was 29.1±5
kg/m² [15-45] for women and 27.6±3.6 kg/m² [22.8-32.9] for men. 40%
of all patients were obese with a mean BMI of 32.9±4.3 kg/m².
Osteopenia was diagnosed in half of the men (55.5%) and most of the
women (70%). 29% of patients suffered from osteoporosis. BMD of the
spine was similar between men and women (p=0.53). Men had higher
BMD of the hip than women (p=0,038). The mainstream of the subjects
>50 y had more vertebral fractures, suffered more from osteoporosis and
had a higher BMI than those < 50 y (95 vs. 5%; p=0.04), (92.3 vs. 77%;
p=0.03) and (82.5 vs. 17.5%; p=0.05), respectively. There was no
correlation between BMD of the spine and higher BMI (0.94 in G1 vs.
0.98 in G2, p=0.3). Similarly, there was no correlation between BMD of
the hip and higher BMI (0.9 in G1 vs. 0.84 in G2, p=0.2). Moreover,
Obese patients had less a vertebral fracture but with no statistically
significant correlation (21% in G1 vs. 25% in G2; p=0.2).
Conclusion: Our study showed that obesity was frequent among
Tunisian patients but was not associated with a higher BMD. Older age
was directly associated with a lower BMD and higher risk for vertebral
fracture.
P105
DENSITOMETRIC VERTEBRAL FRACTURE ASSESSMENT:
FACTORS LIMITING GOOD VISIBILITY OF THE VERTEBRA
Y. Makhlouf1, M. Sellami1, S. Miladi1, A. Fazaa1, L. Souebni1, K.
Ouenniche1, S. Kassab1, S. Chekili1, L. Zakraoui1, K. Ben
Abdelghani1, A. Laatar1
1Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: The radiograph of the spine is the gold standard for
identifying vertebral fractures (VF). Vertebral fracture assessment
(VFA) is a new feature available on modern densitometers that could
assess VF. This technique offers the advantage of low irradiation over
standard radiography but at the cost of lower image quality. The aim of
this study was to assess factors associated with good vertebra visibility
when using VFA.
Methods: This is a cross-sectional study including patients referred by
their physicians for BMD measurement. Anthropometric data were
recorded. BMD was measured using standard methods over the lumbar
spine L1-L4, the total proximal femur. Results were expressed as T-
scores using DXA. The screening for VF was performed by VFA. A
professional operator analyses VFA scans and assessed the good visibility
of the vertebra.
Results: The study included 100 patients. The mean age was 61.7±12.6 y
[18-83]. The average BMI was 28.9±24.2 kg/m2 [14.2-45.3]. The mean
T-score at the vertebral site was -1.5 SD [-4.9-1.5] with a mean mass of
0.95 g/cm² [0.58-1.371]. Osteoporosis was found in 27.7% of patients. A
vertebral fracture was diagnosed in 25% of cases. The visualization of the
vertebra was impaired in the upper thoracic region in 60% of cases. Poor
visibility was observed in 19% of cases in the mid-thoracic spine and only
in 2% of cases in the lumbar spine. No statistically significant correlation
was found between good vertebral visibility and age (p=0.2), weight
(p=0.5), or BMI (p=0.7). However, good visibility of the vertebra was
associated with a lower height (1.7 vs. 1.5 m, p=0.03). A better vertebrae
visualization was correlated neither to the BMD of the right hip (0.84 vs.
0.87, p=0.4) nor to the left hip (0.85 vs. 0.89, p=0.3). Similarly, the
absence of vertebral osteoporosis was not correlated with a better
vertebral visualization (p=0.6).
Conclusion: Visibility of the vertebra on VFA does not appear to be
altered by the BMD and vertebral osteoporosis, suggesting safe use in
the elderly. However, precautions may be taken when interpreting VFA
in patients with high heights.
P106
RELIABILITY OF VERTEBRAL FRACTURE ASSESSMENT
Y. Makhlouf1, M. Sellami1, S. Miladi1, A. Fazaa1, L. Souebni1, K.
Ouenniche1, S. Kassab1, S. Chekili1, L. Zakraoui1, K. Ben
Abdelghani1, A. Laatar1
1Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: Vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) is a new feature
available on modern densitometers. Yet, the assessment of vertebral
fracture (VF) status has not become standard practice. Our study aimed
to evaluate the reliability of VFA as assessed by a rheumatologist and a
radiology technician
Methods: We conducted a cross-sectional study assessing the
performance of low radiation single energy x-ray absorptiometry VFA
for the detection of VF. We selected patients who were assessed for
osteoporosis according to screening protocols. BMD was measured using
standard methods over the lumbar spine L1-L4, the total proximal femur,
and results were expressed as T-scores. All VFAs were independently
evaluated by 2 experienced readers: a rheumatologist and a radiology
technician for the identification of VF (T4-L4). VF was classified
according to the Genant grading system: grade 1 for an anterior, mid or
posterior reduction of 20-25% in vertebral height; grade 2 for a reduction
of 25-40%; and grade 3 for a reduction of >40% in vertebral height. A
score for the interrater reliability between the readers was expressed using
the kappa statistic.
Results: 100 patients were included with a mean age of 66.9±9.5 y
[46.7-83]. There was a female predominance (91%). Nearly half of
patients had osteopenia (48.9%), 27.7% had osteoporosis and 23.4%
had a normal BMD. On VFA scans, the nonvisible vertebra was mostly
located in the upper thoracic spine (60%). The mean number of VF was
1.2 [0-3] for both readers. According to the doctor’s evaluation, 25% of
patients had at least one VF, of which 75.9% had a Genant grade 1, 17.2%
had grade 2, and 6.9% had grade 3. According to the technician
evaluation, at least one VF was found in 36% of patients. A grade 1
was assessed in 91.7% of cases, a grade 2 in 8.3% of patients, but no
VF grade 3 was assessed. A kappa score for the interrater reliability
between the readers for VFA was 0.545 (p=0.000). The overall agreement
by grade between the readers was 0.785 (p=0,000). The exclusion of
S120
nonvisible vertebra resulted in a better agreement (k=0.853). Further
analysis excluding vertebra T4 to D10, revealed a very good agreement
(k=0.9).
Conclusion: Our study showed a low agreement between the readers on
VFA and a better agreement when nonvisible vertebrae were excluded.
Thus, caution should be advocated when relying exclusively on this
device.
P107
OUR EXPERIENCE WITH QUS OF PHALANX IN
SECONDARY OSTEOPOROSIS IN IRAN
Z. Hamidi1, Minoo Najafi1, Maryam Najafi1, M. Mahdavi-Mazdeh2, S.
Maziar3, A. A. Keshtkar4, M. Sedaghat5, F. Zare-Bidaki6, B. Larijani6
1Endocrinology & Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology &
Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, 2Iranian Tissue Bank &
Research Center, 3Dept. of Nephrology, Amir-Alam Hospital, 4Dept. of
Health Sciences Education Development, School of Public Health, 5Dept.
of Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 6Osteoporosis Research
Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: DXA is gold standard of bone densitometry, but it is
expensive, nonportable and uses radiation. Quantitative ultrasound
(QUS) of bone has fewer burdens and is portable. QUS of phalanx, due
to physical and structural characteristics of phalanx is one the most
practical BMD machine. So we tried to assess its usefulness in
osteoporosis diagnosis.
Methods: We entered 200 adult secondary osteoporosis patients
(rheumatoid arthritis, hemodialysis, renal transplantation and
levothyroxine users) to this study and compared their phalanx QUS
results with normal age and sex matched controls. Also the results of
QUS, compared with DXA results to find the correlation between these
two methods in diagnosis of osteoporosis.
Results: Results was not significantly different between normal and
patients except in hemodialysis patients (P value=0.00). Also the results
of QUS compared with DXA results showed no significant correlation in
diagnosis of osteoporosis except in hemodialysis in spine and femoral
region (P value=0.023 and P value=0.21, respectively) and levothyroxine
group in spinal region (P value=0.005).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that QUS of phalanx may be useful in
screening secondary osteoporosis; but for establishment of diagnosis by
QUA, DXA measurement is needed.
P108
PREDICTING RESPONSE TO VITAMIN D TREATMENT ON
OSTEOARTHRITIS: A RADIOMICS NOMOGRAM BASED ON
MRI
T. Lin1, S. Fu2, D. Zeng3, S. Lu1, M. Zhou1, J. Li4, T. Chen4, T. Fan4, C.
Lang4, J. Ma2, X. Quan1, F. Cicuttini5, C. Ding4, Z. Zhu4
1Dept. of Radiology, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China, 2School of Biomedical Engineering, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China, 3College of Automation
Science & Engineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, China, 4Clinical Research Centre, Zhujiang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China, 5Dept. of
Epidemiology & Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia
Objective: To develop and validate a radiomics nomogram by combing
the optimized radiomics features extracted from MRI images and clinical
characteristics for predicting the treatment response of vitamin D
supplementation defining as 20% improvement of knee pain on patients
with osteoarthritis (OA).Methods: Participants were selected from the
Vitamin D Effects on Osteoarthritis (VIDEO) study, which is a
randomized, placebo controlled, and double blinded clinical trial. 216
patients in Hobart center underwent MR scans of the target knees using
a 1.5 T MRI scanner were analyzed. We segmented and depicted tibial
subchondral bone region of interests that beneath articular cartilage and
above epiphyseal line. Radiomics-based predicting models incorporating
the radiomics features and independent clinical risk factors were
constructed using Relief (RELF) based feature selection method and
logistic regression based classification method, and expressed as a
nomogram in the training cohort (n=172). The performance of radiomics
nomogram was assessed by discrimination, calibration and clinical
constructive validity. The results were then validated in an independent
validation cohort (n=44).Results: A total of 974 radiomics features were
extracted from T1 and T2 images for each patient in the training cohort.
The radiomics nomogram incorporating six selected radiomics features,
sex, baseline total knee pain score, radiographic OA ROA) score, bone
marrow lesions (BML) achieved a better discrimination performance than
clinical model (sex, total knee pain score, ROA and BML) in both
training (AUC: 0.77 vs. 0.70) and validating cohort (AUC: 0.80 vs.
0.71). The calibration curve showed satisfactory concordance between
the observed and estimated frequencies in both cohorts. Additionally,
radiomics nomogram outperformed the clinical model with favorable
net reclassification index [0.20 (95%CI: 0.06-0.34) in training cohort
and 0.24 (95%CI: 0.02-0.48) in validating cohort]. Decision curve
analysis confirmed the clinical usefulness of radiomics nomogram for
predicting treatment response of vitamin D supplementation on OA
patients.Conclusion: The MRI based radiomics nomogram achieves a
favorable predictive efficacy in differentiating responders from non-
responders among OA patients treated with vitamin D. This proof-of-
concept study provides a promising way to predict clinical outcomes of
certain OA treatments.
P109
DO FRAILTY SCORES PREDICT OUTCOME AFTER
P R O X I M A L
F E M O R A L R E P L A C E M E N T F O R
MUSCULOSKELETAL TUMOURS?
M. T. Buldu1, C. Wigley1, P. Bassett2, S. Kapoor1, C. Gerrand1
1Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, Stanmore, 2Statsconsultancy Ltd.,
Amersham, UK
Objective: Frailty is a concept where an individual has exceptionally low
physiological compensation, resilience and adaptive capacity to external
stressors with unfavourable consequences. Frailty has a negative
independent relationship with morbidity and mortality. The aim of this
study was to investigate frailty in patients undergoing surgery for
musculoskeletal tumours, by applying frailty scoring systems and
exploring correlations with survival and secondary outcome measures.
Methods: This was a retrospective study of patients over 60 y of age
undergoing proximal femoral replacement for musculoskeletal
tumours. Patients were classified as fit, vulnerable or frail using the
modified frailty index, Rockwood and ASA grading systems.
Correlation was performed with outcomes including survival and length
of hospital stay (LOS).
Results: 85 patients were identified of mean age 72.6 y. Median follow-
up was 18.9 months (range 0.1-56.4). The overall median survival in frail
groups was 19.8 months regardless of the scoring system used. Frail
patients classified by the Rockwood score had a greater LOS and a trend
to reduced survival.
Conclusion: There is a high prevalence of frailty in this cohort of
patients. The Rockwood score is related to overall survival and LOS.
Therefore, frailty scores should be considered when planning surgery as
part of appropriate holistic care. Moreover, a median survival greater than
18 months in frail patients supports the decision to offer surgery which
S121
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
may positively impact quality of life in the short term. Further research to
identify the relationship between frailty and outcomes in musculoskeletal
tumour patients is needed.
P110
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF RNA N6-METHYLADENOSINE IN
OSTEOPOROSIS? A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
G. Li1, X. Chen1, J. D. A. Adachi2
1Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital, Guangzhou, China,
2McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
Background: RNA N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification has been
widely reported to play a significant role in oncology. Some recent studies
suggested m6A was also involved in bone development and metabolism.
Nevertheless there was no summarized evidence to reveal the impact of
m6A on osteoporosis.
Methods: We conducted a systematic review to include studies assessing
the role of m6A in osteoporosis by searching PubMed and EMBASE (up
to July 2019). Studies that evaluated the association between m6A and
bone metabolism and osteoporosis, and provided sufficient data for
extraction, were eligible for inclusion.
Results: There were nine studies included for analyses, among which six
were experimental research, two candidate gene association studies, and
one genomewide association study. M6A methyltransferase METTL3
and demethyltransferase FTO were found to be involved in the delicate
process between adipogenesis differentiation and osteogenic
differentiation. Conditional knockdown of the METTL3 in bone marrow
stem cells could suppress PI3K-Akt signaling, limit the expression of
bone formation-related genes, restrain the expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor and downregulate the decreased translation
efficiency of PTH receptor-1 mRNA. Similarly, FTO prompted the shift
of BMSC lineage commitment to adipocyte and inhibited bone formation
during osteoporosis.
Conclusion: RNA m6A performs important functions in osteoporosis,
which may be helpful in prevention, treatment, and management of
osteoporosis.
P111
THE INFLUENCE OF ANTI-TNF DRUGS ON OSTEOPOROSIS
IN PATIENTS WITH RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
D. Ruci1, V. Ruci2, M. Jordhani3
1UHC Mother Teresa, Tirana, 2Trauma University Hospital Tirana,
Tirana, 3Korça Regional Hospital, Korçe, Albania
Objective: In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), because of inflammation and
steroid therapy, there is an elevated risk for the patients to develop
osteoporosis. In fact, the more inflammation, the more severe the
osteoporosis. AntiTNF drugs, because of the inhibition of TNF, could
improve the bone turnover and eventually the bone densitometry in
patients with RA. This study aimed to evaluate the impact of anti-TNF
drugs on osteoporosis in patients with RA.
Methods: This is a case-control study including 123 patients with RA.
The first group consisted of 63 patients with RA, receiving methotrexate
as disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD), besides steroids,
NSAIDs, and calcium supplements. The second group consisted of 60
patients receiving the anti-TNF drug as well as the medication the first
group received. All patients were evaluated before and 1 y after the
therapy initiation about their DXA. All data were gathered and analyzed
using statistical methods.
Results: After gathering and evaluating all data, it resulted that for the
first group, there was a slight worsening of DXA results after 1 y of
conservative therapy (T-score L1-L4 average, from -2.4 to -2.6); while
for the second group, the T-score L1-L4 changed from -2.3 to -1.8.
Conclusion: It was found that the use of anti-TNF drugs in patients with
RA may contribute to improving DXA results and eventually in reducing
the risk for osteoporosis.
P112
COST OF OSTEOPOROSIS-RELATED HIP FRACTURES IN A
PRIVATE TERTIARY HOSPITAL
A. J. Ho1
1Chong Hua Hospital, Cebu, Philippines
Objective: Osteoporotic fractures, especially of the hip, lead to great
burden both for the patient and economy. Due to the paucity of burden
of illness studies of osteoporosis in the Asian region, particularly the
Philippines, it is difficult to allocate healthcare resources appropriately
for fracture prevention. The availability of information on the financial
burden of osteoporosis-related fractures, particularly in the local region,
will create awareness of the size of the problem as well as assist healthcare
authorities to initiate appropriate programs and strategies. This study
aimed to determine the cost of osteoporosis-related hip fractures in a
private tertiary hospital.
Methods: Data from the medical records of patients diagnosed with
osteoporosis-related hip fractures who were hospitalized from January
1, 2017 to December 31, 2019 were analyzed. The researcher recorded
the patient’s demographic data, type of hip fracture, type of treatment,
duration of hospitalization, and medical costs. Descriptive statistics, t-test,
chi-squared test, ANOVA with Tukey HSD test and regression analysis
were employed to treat and analyze the different sets of data.
Results: Among the 150 patients, 44.6% were within the ≥80 years old
age group and majority (76%) were females. The most common type of
osteoporotic hip fracture involved the femoral neck (52.7%) and most of
the patients underwent partial hip replacement (66%). Patients ≥80 age
group, those sustaining an intertrochanteric fracture and those who were
treated with internal fixation had a longer length of stay in the hospital.
There was note of a parallel increase in the direct medical cost as the
patients age group got older. It was found that femoral neck fracture
had significantly higher implant costs while the other costs
(hospitalization, surgery, laboratories, and medications) were observed
to be comparable between the two types of fracture.
Conclusion: The overall mean cost of osteoporotic hip fracture was
5227.78 USD. The implant used on average accounted for approximately
27% of the total direct medical costs. It was noted that 26% and 23% of
the total cost was attributed to the cost of surgery and hospitalization,
respectively. Medication costs accounted for 11%, while laboratory costs
comprised 13% of total costs.
P113
REARRAN GING THE PLAYLIST - OP TIMIZIN G
S E Q U E N T I A L A N D C O M B I N E D A N A B O L I C &
ANTIRESORPTIVE THERAPY FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
MANAGEMENT: A CONSENSUS REPORT BY THE
EGYPTIAN ACADEMY OF BONE HEALTH
Y. El Miedany1, M. Abu Zaid2, M. El Gaafary3, M. Hasab El Naby4, N.
Fathi5, H. Saber6, W. Hassan7, M. Eissa8, N. Mohannad9, H. Khaled10,
M. Mortada11, S. Galal10, R. Ghaleb12, S. Tabra2, S. Mohamed8, B.
Medhat8, R. Ali10, H. Aly13, G. Elolemy7, N. Fouad14, S. Ganeb7, Y.
Adel15, M. Ibrahim16, O. Farouk17, A. El-Shanawany18, N. Gadallah10
1Canterbury Christ Church University, Kent, UK, 2Rheumatology &
Rehabilitation Tanta University, Tanta, 3Community & Public Health
Ain Shams University, Cairo, 4Rheumatology & Rehabilitation Ain
Shams University, Cairo, 5Rheumatology & Rehabilitation Assiut
University, Assiut, 6Geriatrics & Gerontology, Ain Shams University,
Cairo, 7Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Benha University, Benha,
8Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Cairo University, Cairo, 9Internal
S122
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Medicine & Rheumatology, Alexandria University Hospitals,
Alexandria, 10Rheumatology, Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Ain
Shams University, Cairo, 11Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Zagazig
University, Zagazig, 12Rheumatology & Rehabilitation Dept., Minia
University, Minia, 13Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Al-Azhar
University, Cairo, 14Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Fayoum
University, Fayoum, 15Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Mansoura
University, Mansoura, 16Rheumatology & Immunology, Health
insurance, Ministry of Health, Cairo, 17Dept. of Orthopaedic & Trauma
Surgery, Assiut University, Assiut, 18Rheumatology & Rehabilitation,
Menoufia University, Menoufia, Egypt
Objective: With the expansion of osteoporosis therapy options, clinical
guidelines started to adopt new concepts such as short treatment courses
and drug holidays. The introduction of the new concept of very high
fracture risk has had its impact on the choices that treating doctors make
when commencing, selecting to continue, or switching therapies.
Therefore, one of the vital decisions which should be carefully considered
is whether, when, and in what sequence anabolic/antiresorptive therapies
should be employed. Aims: 1. to review and update the available
therapeutic interventions approaches of osteoporosis patients at very high
fracture risk, based on the best possible evidence; 2. to determine the
manner in which these therapies can be implemented to standardize
clinical practice for the prevention of osteoporotic fragility fracture.
Methods: Delphi approach was convened to establish consensus among
bone health experts on best practice management approach for patients at
very high risk of osteoporotic fragility fractures adopting a treat-to-target
strategy. The level of evidence and the grade of recommendation were
classified according to the model of the Center for Evidence Based
Medicine in Oxford, and the grade of agreement was extracted using
the Delphi technique. A Delphi questionnaire was developed and each
statement was rated between 1-9 with 1 being ‘complete disagreement’
and 9 being ‘complete agreement’.
Results: The expert panel composed of 24 experts employed a two-round
Delphi consensus process. Seven statements were included entailing the
sequential and combination therapy for management of osteoporosis in
patients at very high fracture risk. Very high fracture risk was defined as
BMD T-score <-2.5 in addition to multiple vertebral fractures or FRAX
probability >30% MOF, >4.5% hip fracture. Level of evidence was 2a for
sequential therapy and 2b for combined therapy (PTH and denosumab).
Agreement with the recommendations (rank 7-9) ranged from 83.3-
95.8%. After making some amendments, consensus was reached (i.e.,
≥75% of respondents strongly agreed or agreed) on the wording of all 7
recommendations. The mean rate of agreement ranged between 8.38
±1.06 and 8.71±0.69. An updated treatment algorithm was produced
including recommended therapeutic options, duration of treatment and
post-treatment management protocols.
Conclusion: Based on the available evidence and expert clinical
experience, this work was able to stimulate a cohesive approach to the
management of osteoporosis in patients at very high fracture risk to
replace current variations in therapeutic options. It can serve as a useful
tool that will contribute to the standardization of clinical practice for this
pathology. Optimizing therapeutic approaches with sequential anabolic/
antiresorptive as well as combined antiresorptive/anabolic therapies
appear to provide the most substantial and clinically relevant skeletal
benefits to this osteoporotic patients cohort.
P114
INFLUENCE OF PHARMACOLOGICAL OSTEOPOROSIS
T R E A T M E N T O N R E F R A C T U R E S F O L L O W I N G
KYPHOPLASTY
I. Alam1, Z. Alam2, M. Rumi3
1New College of Florida, Bradenton, 2LECOM, Bradenton, 3Orthopedic
Associates of Central Texas, Austin, USA
Objective: To examine the relationship between pharmacological
osteoporosis treatment on the refracture rate in patients who have had a
thoracic or lumbar level kyphoplasty. A kyphoplasty was a noninvasive
vertebral augmentation surgery used to treat compression fractures. It was
a known fact that a kyphoplasty could cause future compression fractures
at the levels above and below the initial procedure. In addition, spinal
compression fractures were considered to be osteoporotic fractures.
Methods: A single center observational cohort study with 192 patients
who had kyphoplasty from 2015-2019 was conducted. The cohort was
divided into two groups with a 1:1 ratio. The two groups were labeled
Group I (pharmacological osteoporosis treatment) and Group II (no
pharmacological osteoporosis treatment). Refracture was defined as
having at least one future osteoporotic compression fracture requiring a
kyphoplasty after the initial. Patients that had a subsequent fracture
following the initial kyphoplasty procedure were placed into the “post
kyphoplasty refracture” category, whereas those that did not have a
fracture subsequent to the initial kyphoplasty were categorized as “no post
kyphoplasty refracture”. 44 patients self-reported the intent to start
osteoporosis treatment with their primary care provider and were placed
in an intended to treat group (ITT).
Results: A chi-square independence test was used to analyze the data.
There was a significant reduction in the refracture rate (χ2=4.4045,
p=0.036). In Group I, the ITT group were the only patients who were
lost to follow up. 0 were lost to follow up in Group II.
Conclusion: The chi-square independence test suggested a strong
dependent relationship between pharmacological osteoporosis treatment
and the refracture rate following kyphoplasty and determined significance
in data. This study gave physicians a treatment method to reduce the
chance of patients developing future compression fractures. Thus, leading
to far less future kyphoplasty procedures.
P115
POTENTIAL INTEREST OF VITAMIN D SUPPLEMENTATION
TO PATIENTS WITH RESPIRATORY TRACT INFECTIONS
(RTI)
R. Amir1
1Centre de Santé des Fagnes Chimay, Chimay, Belgium
Objective: Assessment of the overall effect of vitamin D
supplementation using relevant procedure to improve the prognosis of
RTI either in cases of frequent infections or to prevent or minimise effects
of acute RTI.
Methods: After review and analysis of multiple publications and several
studies, this retrospective meta-analysis of data help to demonstrate that
vitamin D supplementation is safe and can protect against acute RTI
whatever the age of the patients. This communication reviews the roles
of vitamin D in reducing the risk of RTI, knowledge about the evidence
that vitamin D could reduce, particularly, risk of influenza infections by
several mechanisms including cathelicidins and defencins that can lower
viral replication rates and reducing concentrations of pro-inflammatory
cytokines that contribute to produce the inflammation that injures the
lining of the lungs, leading to pneumonia as well as increasing
concentrations of anti-inflammatory cytokines.
Results: Vitamin D is considered to be important for a healthy immune
system by inducing expression of antimicrobial peptides in immune cells
and at epithelial surfaces (1). Moreover vitamin D has anti-inflammatory
effects on the adaptive immune system and can downregulate pro-
inflammatory cytokines and increase immune regulatory T-cells (2,3).
Both innate and adaptive immune responses can very according to
different polymorphisms found in many steps of the vitamin D pathway.
Conclusion: The vitamin D supplementation increases the probability to
stay free of RTI. In many studies, the findings support the notion that
vitamin D status should be monitored in adult patients with RTI and
suggest that an adapted supplementation of vitamin D deficiency could
S123
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
be a safe and cheap way to reduce RTI and improve health in this
vulnerable patient population. To reduce the risk of infection, it is
recommended that people at risk of RTI consider taking for adult patient
about 2000 UI/d of vitamin D3 to raise 25(OH)D concentration above 40-
50 ng/ml.
References:
1. Wang TT, et al. J Immunol 2004;173:2909.
2. Daniel C, et al. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008;324:23.
3. Lemire JM, et al. J Nutr 1995:125(suppl 6):17045.
P116
POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTION OF VITAMIN D IN SARS-COV-2
VIRUS/COVID-19 DISEASE (SCVD)
R. Amir1
1Centre de Santé des Fagnes Chimay, Chimay, Belgium
Objective: To provide a balanced scientific view on vitamin D and
SCVD. It reports many information resulting from several and recent
studies, providing from different sources.
Methods: It has been reported in many recent studies that vitamin D
deficiencies have a higher risk of mortality from SCVD and it has been
suggested that vitamin D supplementation can be effective in lowering
the rate of SCVD intensive care unit admissions. In view of current
interest in vitamin D as a potential factor in the COVID-19 pandemic,
we have analysed, by retrospective review, the ways in which vitamin D
reduces the risk of viral infections (1,2), and the potential contribution in
COVID-19 disease. Vitamin D has many mechanisms by which it
reduces the risk of microbial infection and death. The most commonly
processes known are: physical barrier, cellular natural immunity and
adaptive immunity (3). Vitamin D helps maintain right, gap, and
adherences junctions (4).
Results: Vitamin D enhances cellular innate immunity partly through the
induction of antimicrobial peptides, including human cathelicidin (5,6) and
defensins (7). Vitamin D also enhances cellular immunity, in part by
reducing the cytokine storm induced by the innate immune. This system
generates pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines in response
to viral and bacterial infections as observed in COVID-19 patients (8). It is
relevant to suppose that an adapted supplementation to patients, taking in
account the turnover of vitamin D in the body, by reference to 25(OH)D
serum concentration could be imagined as reference, taking everything
into consideration.
Conclusion: We can confirm observational evidence of a link of
vitamin D with mortality and morbidity of SCVD. Based on the
concept of balance benefit risk, we propose to people at risk of
SCVD and diagnosed patients, a supplementation of vitamin D for
adult patient, close to 2000 UI/d of vitamin D3 to raise 25(OH)D
concentration about 50-60 ng/ml.
References:
1. Beard JA, et al. Clin Virol 2011;50:194.
2. Holick MF. N Engl J Med 2007;357:266.
3. Rondanelli M, et al. Alternat Med 2018:5813095 (cross ref).
4. Schwalfenberg GK. Nutr Food Res 2011;55:96.
5. Liu PT, et al. Science 2006;311:1770.
6. Adams JS, et al. Immunol 2009;182:4289.
7. Laaksi I. Proc Nutr Soc 2012;71:90.
8. Huang C, et al. Lancet 2020;395:497.
P117
METFORMIN USE AND RISK OF TOTAL JOINT
REPLACEMENT IN PATIENTS WITH DIABETESA
POPULATION-BASED COHORT STUDY
Z. Zhu1, J. Huang2, G. Ruan3, C. Chen3, C. Cao3, Z. Zhang3, H. Hunter4,
C. Wei5, D. Ding3
1Clnincal Research Centre, Zhujiang Hospital of Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China, 2Dept. of Medical Research, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taichung, Taiwan, 3Clinical
Research Centre, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China, 4Dept. of Rheumatology, Royal North Shore
Hospital and Institute of Bone & Joint Research, Kolling Institute,
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 5Institute of Medicine, Chung
Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
Objective: To examine the association of metformin prescription with
risks of total knee and/or hip joint replacement among patients with type 2
diabetes.
Methods: A population-based cohort study used 2000-2013 Taiwan’s
national health insurance research database. We selected patients over 45
years old when they newly diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
DM patients were classified into metformin and nonmetformin users based
on if metformin was ever used after diagnosis. Prescription time-
distribution matching (PTDM) was performed to select the age, sex, and
year of DM diagnosis paired exposure and nonexposure candidates. Then,
propensity score matching (PSM) was used to balance the age, sex,
urbanization, insurance type, adapted diabetes complication index,
medications for pain management, hyaluronic acid and physical
rehabilitation between two groups. The risk of knee and/or hip joint
replacement after metformin use were assessed using Cox proportional
hazard regression. Dosage of metformin (0, ≤1.0 mg/d; >1 mg/d) at
baseline and the landmark (12/24 months after first prescription) were
performed to evaluate potential dose-response relationship. Sensitivity
analysis was performed by using inverse probability of treatment
weighting (IPTW) and completing risk models.
Results: A total of 40,694 participants (20,347 nonmetformin vs. 20,347
metformin) were included (mean [SD] age, 63 [11] y; 49.8% were women)
after PTDM. Comparing with the nonmetformin users, patients who used
metformin had a lower risk of total knee or hip joint replacement (adjusted
HR (aHR) = 0.67, 95%CI=0.58-0.76 for any joint replacement;
aHR=0.67, 95%CI=0.59-0.79 for total knee replacement; aHR=0.59,
95%CI=0.41-0.85 for total hip replacement) after adjustment for covariates.
PSM analyses in participants (10,163 nonmetformin vs. 10,163 metformin)
and sensitivity analyses using IPDW and completing risk models showed
similar results. Significant dose-response relationships (all p for trend
<0.05) were observed between metformin use at baseline or 12/24
landmark points and total knee/hip replacement.
Conclusion: Use of metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes was
associated with a significantly reduced risk of total joint replacement
due to osteoarthritis, suggesting a potentially therapeutic effect of
metformin on osteoarthritis. Further randomized controlled clinical trials
are warranted to confirm the findings.
P118
ATYPICAL FEMORAL FRACTURE, OSTEOPOROSIS AND
BIPHOSPHONATES: WHAT IS THE RELATIONSHIP?
I. Puyuelo Jarne1, A. C. Laga Cuen1, A. Aguirre Extebarria1, P. Sevilla
Ortega1, P. Isla Sarasa1, N. Pardina Lanuza1
1Servicio Riojano de Salud, Traumatologia, Hospital San Pedro,
Logroño, Spain
Objective: To know the personal history importance of each patient
when evaluating long bone fractures and posterior management.
Methods: We present the case about a 55 years old women who suffers
accidental trauma at home that causes several pain and functional
impotence so she decides to go to the hospital where she is diagnosed
with a subtrochanteric femoral fracture.
Results: Analyzing the radiological characteristics of the fracture, we are
surprised by the fact that it meets the criteria for an atypical fracture so
when asking about personal history and previous treatments, the patient
S124
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
tells us that she has been taking bisphosphonates for three years due to
osteoporosis and the last month she refers a pain in his left hip that
prevents her from walking normally.
Conclusion: Bisphosphonates are medications used for the osteoporosis
treatment in order to reduce the risk of fracture in these patients, but
should not be administered indefinitely because their effectiveness
decreases beyond 5 years and the increased risk of serious adverse events,
such as atypical femoral fractures.
P119
HIP DYSPLASIA, OSTEOPOROSIS AND CUT-THROUGH
NAIL: NOW WHAT?
I. Puyuelo Jarne1, A. C. Laga Cuen1, A. Aguirre Extebarria1, P. Sevilla
Ortega1, P. Isla Sarasa1, N. Pardina Lanuza1
1Servicio Riojano de Salud, Traumatologia, Hospital San Pedro,
Logroño, Spain
Objective: Know the possible complications that can exist in elderly
patients who suffer trochanteric fractures.
Methods: We present the case about a 88 years old patient who suffers 3
months ago a trochanteric femoral fracture after falling at home. The x-
ray shows a typical pertrochanteric fracture, but really impresses us is the
several same hip dysplasia that the patient suffers.
Results: As the objective of treatment in this patient was to nail the
fracture, we proceed to do, using a standard gamma nail, with good
postoperative results and in subsequent consultations. The patient was
walking a month after the surgery with some independence at daily life.
Three months later the patient comes to the consultation with hip pain and
inability to walk, at the x-rays we can see one type of complication that
does not occur frequently in this type of age patients, a cut-through nail,
with a small difference, this patient had a several dysplasia at same hip
that increased the difficulty in managing this complication.
Conclusion: In the cut-through exists a central position perforation at the
hip joint without cephalic screw loosening. These type of complications
can be explained by a biomechanical change in the fracture site when the
patient begins loading and walking on the member intervened. Collapse of
the femoral neck and shear forces in a comminuted area, around the lag
screw can produce a collapse in the area of
the fracture. Having
osteoporosis is also an added risk factor in these patients to suffer this
type of complication.
P120
DOUBLE OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURE IN UPPER
EXTREMITY, ARE WE DOING IT RIGHT?
N. Pardina Lanuza1, I. Puyuelo Jarne1, A. C. Laga Cuen1, A. Aguirre
Etxebarria1, P. Sevilla Ortega1, P. Isla Sarasa1
1Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain
Osteoporosis is a systemic disease whose incidence is increasing in recent
years. Therefore it, the incidence of osteoporotic fractures also increases.
We present the case of a 63-year-old female patient, who suffered a
subcapital fracture of the right humerus in 2019, treated conservatively
with immobilization. After her recovery, a bone densitometry was
performed, with which the patient was diagnosed with osteoporosis in
the lumbar spine and grade II osteopenia in the femoral neck. For this
reason, we decided to start, in October 2019, treatment with alendronic
acid, calcium and vitamin D.
A year and a half later, the patient went to the emergency room due to a
low energy fall on the public highway. She reported functional impotence
in the right upper limb. X-rays are taken and the existence of a double
fracture in the limb is observed: supra-intercondylar humerus fracture and
distal radius fracture.
The patient needed surgery for both fractures, we performed
osteosynthesis with 90º double plate in the elbow using a posterior
approach with osteotomy of the olecranon and osteosynthesis with a
preformed distal radius plate using a volar approach.
Osteoporosis is present in our daily work. This case shows us how a
patient with correct treatment for osteoporosis suffers again a double
osteoporotic fracture after a low-energy trauma. This makes us ask
ourselves… are we really doing it right?
P121
SELF-DIRECTED AGEISM AND PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE
AMONG OLDER ADULTS
A. I. Gasparik1, B. Mester-Nagy1, M. Cevei2, S. Mihalcea3, D.
Stoicanescu4, M. Farcas2, Z. S. Csata5
1University of Medicine, Pharmacy, Science & Technology of Targu
Mures, Tirgu Mures, 2Universitatea din Oradea, Oradea, 3Rehab.
Hospital, Baile Felix, 4UMF Victor Babes, Timisoara, 5University
Babes-Bolyai, Cluj Napoca, Romania
Objective: Age-related impairments in muscle performance have been
proved to be influenced by various, including psychological,
factors. Evidence shows that ageism negatively impacts the health of
older adults: those with negative attitudes about ageing may live 7.5 years
less than those with positive. This study aimed to explore possible links
between physical performance and the prejudicial attitudes among older
persons towards their own age group.
Methods: The survey consisting of 29 variables assessed
sociodemographic parameters, physical fitness and attitudes toward
ageing. Correlation, OLS regression and factor analysis were used.
Results: Based on the responses of 227 persons (age 60+/ ~73):
education and rural environment reduce the tendency to think
stereotypically. The negative elderly (self) picture increases with age.
However, age-related perceptions were not correlated with BMI, the
chair-test was the strongest predictor of the age-related attitudes
(t=3.123, p=0.002). In a next step, we performed factor analysis on the
24-item scale about ageing perceptions. Four factors explained 50% of
S125
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
the total variance, including the feeling of loneliness and exclusion, which
proved to have a significant effect on muscle performance along with
higher education, rural residence and age.
Conclusion: Seniors with negative stereotypes of ageing are
characterized by significantly lower muscle performance. Investigation
of the causal relationship between physical health and mental disposition
is needed in order to verify if changing society's view of aging can delay
age-related declines in muscle function.
P122
R I S K F A C T O R S O F T H E D E V E L O P M E N T O F
OSTEOPOROSIS IN FEMALE WITH RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS, NONTREATMENT BY GLUCOCORTICOIDS
E. Taskina1, L. Alekseeva1, N. Kashevarova1, D. Kusevich1, I.
Dydykina1, A. Smirnov1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Tradition basic risk factors of osteoporosis (OP) is middle-age
and glucocorticoids (GC), negative affect in quality of bone tissue and
decrease BMD. Aim was to define role of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in the
development of OP in female with RA up to 60 years old, nontreatment
with GC.Methods: The study included 52 RA females (according to
ACR 1987 criteria), nontreatment of GC, in age between 20-60 years
old (mean 50.2±7.4). An patient's file contained social and demographic
data, anthropometric parameters, medical history, clinical and lab
examination, traditional OP risk factors, joint status and comorbidities.
Hand and distal feet X-ray was taken in each case. Van der Heijde
modified Sharp method was used to score the erosions and joint space
narrowing in hands and feet. Axial BMD was measured using DXA scan.
DXA T-score was used in postmenopausal women and Z-score in
menstruating women. After examination patient were divided in two
groups with and without osteoporosis: 14 (26.9%) and 38 (73.1%),
respectively. Both groups are similar by mean age and anthropometric
characteristics, debut age and disease duration, stage of clinical lab
activity and HAQ.Results: In first group vs. second, number of patients
with 4 flares of RA during the last year were over (42.9% vs. 15.8%,
р=0.04), difference was significant. Statistically significant intergroups
differences was identified by quantitative assessment of X-ray by Sharp
method (Sharp-Van der Heijde): the assessment of erosions in group 1
was 51(28.5-77), in group 2 was 6 (1.5-18), p<0.001, scoring of joint
space narrowing 115.5(83-126) vs. 69(50-98), p<0.04 and the total
Sharpe index 165(119.5-196.5) vs. 80(51-117), p<0.008, respectively.
When assessing traditional risk factors, it was shown that in the
postmenopausal period were 13 patients from group 1 (92.9%) and 21
(55.3%) patients from group 2 (OR=1.68, 95%CI 1.22-2.32, p=0.01).
Periods of immobilization (more than two months) and low-energy
fractures in the history were also more often detected in OP (respectively,
28.6 and 2.6%, OR=10.9, 95%CI 1.32–89.0, p=0.02; 50 and 18.4%,
OR=2.71, 95%CI 1.13–6.52, p=0.03). Multifactorial analysis identified
the following major OP risk factors: Sharp erosion score, fracture incident
in medical history, menopause, smoking; the contribution of these
variables in OP development was assessed (discriminant function
coefficients: 0.0946; 3.6973; 3.5363; 2.6253, respectively). In according
to revealed risk factors and their coefficients was created a ROC curve
(AUC) model allows to predict the axial OP with high accuracy, equal to
92.9% (with the area under the ROC curve equal to 0.969, Fig.1).
Conclusion: Development of OP in female with RA up to 60 years old,
nontreatment of GC was conditioned to erosive X-ray changes in hand
and distal feet (assessment by Sharp method), smoking, menopause and
fact history of fracture.
P123
RAPAMYCIN IMPROVES BONE MASS IN HIGH TURNOVER
OSTEOPOROSIS WITH IRON ACCUMULATION THROUGH
P O S I T I V E E F F E C T S O N O S T E O G E N E S I S A N D
ANGIOGENESIS
W. Aifei1, W. Jiadong1, X. Youjia1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China
Objective: Iron accumulation is an independent risk factors of type I
osteoporosis, and mTOR plays an important role on the crosstalk between
osteogenesis and angiogenesis. This study aimed to identify the role of
mTOR in the high-turnover osteoporosis with iron accumulation, the
underlying molecular mechanism, and whether rapamycin can target at
mTOR treating type I osteoporosis with iron accumulation effectively.
Methods: We establish mouse models of iron accumulation and
transgenic mouse models (Hepc-/-) of high turnover type osteoporosis
with iron accumulation to observe the variety of mTOR in these mice,
and treat osteoblasts with FAC to watch mTOR in vitro. Then we injected
rapamycin to mouse models of high turnover osteoporosis with iron
accumulation, transfected the FAC treated osteoblasts with mTOR
relative siRNA and cultured HUVECs with corresponding medium
extracted from osteoblasts, to detect indexes of bone, osteogenesis and
angiogenesis in bone and in vitro. Finally, relative biomarkers of cell
signaling pathways were measured.
Results: We found the osteoblastic mTOR was activated both in mouse
models of iron accumulation and high turnover osteoporosis with iron
accumulation, and the deteriorative bone, osteogenesis and angiogenesis
induced by iron accumulation were improved by suppressing mTOR with
rapamycin in mice and siRNA transfection in vitro. The mTOR/STAT1/
Cxcl9 pathway signals were stimulated by iron accumulation in
osteoblasts.
Conclusion: Our study shows that iron accumulation impairs the bone
regeneration of osteoporosis via osteoblastic mTOR/STAT1/Cxcl9
pathway, and rapamycin can target at mTOR improving osteogenesis
and angiogenesis in bone of high turnover type osteoporosis with iron
accumulation to increase bone mass.
S126
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P124
RESEARCH ON KEY MOLECULES OF OSTEOPOROSIS
BASED O N PROTEOMICS OF BONE TISSUE IN
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
W. Aifei1, Z. Hui1, C. Bin1, X. Youjia1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China
Objective: Using bone tissue proteomics analysis to find new
mechanisms and new targets for the pathogenesis of postmenopausal
osteoporosis, and to provide new strategies for the diagnosis and
prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis.
Methods: In this study, patients were screened according to the inclusion
and exclusion criteria, and the femoral skull tissue samples were
collected. A total of 96 femoral skull tissue samples were collected. A
total of 83 samples were qualified for protein examination. The bone
tissue samples were performed according to the BMD T value of the
patient's hip. Grouping: normal group (T>-1.0, group A), osteopenia
group (-2.5<T<-1.0, group B), osteoporosis group (T<-2.5, group C),
all samples were protein Extracted, digested with trypsin, and labeled
with TMT. After HPLC fractionation, liquid chromatography mass
spectrometry was used to analyze the expression levels of different
proteins in each bone tissue specimen; analysis of proteins with
significant differential expression between each group of bone tissues
(change fold ≥1.2, P value ≤0.05), perform bioinformatics analysis, and
further screen the three groups of osteoporosis group, osteopenia group
and normal group that show continuous upregulation or downregulation
as possible key molecules of osteoporosis.
Results: This postmenopausal female bone tissue proteomics study
identified 3743 proteins in human bone tissues, of which 3280 proteins
contained quantitative information. Using 1.2 times as the differential
expression change threshold and statistical test t-test p-value <0.05 as
the significance threshold, then among the quantified proteins, the
expression of 353 proteins in the B/A comparison group was upregulated,
and 387 proteins The expression was downregulated; the expression of
343 proteins in the C/A comparison group was upregulated, and the
expression of 288 proteins was downregulated; the expression of 224
proteins in the C/B comparison group was upregulated, and the
expression of 310 proteins was downregulated; and for all differentially
expressed proteins functional classification, functional enrichment and
cluster analysis based on functional enrichment were carried out; through
further screening of the proteins that showed continuous changes in the
three groups, 18 downregulated proteins and 13 upregulated proteins
were found, a total of 31 differences in the same direction and significant
The proteins include COL1A1, COL1A2 and DMP1, which are known to
play an important role in bone metabolism. Among the 31 differential
proteins, 26 proteins have not been reported in bone metabolism related
research.
Conclusion: This proteomics has identified a large number of proteins in
the bone tissues of postmenopausal women, and found that there are
significant differences in the proteins in bone tissues among people with
normal, osteopenia and osteoporosis. Through screening, we have
obtained 31 significantly different proteins. These proteins include not
only the currently known protein molecules related to bone metabolism,
but also many proteins with unknown functions and roles in the process
of bone metabolism. These may be clues for new mechanisms and new
targets for the pathogenesis of postmenopausal osteoporosis.
P125
MODERN POSSIBILITIES OF COMBINED THERAPY OF
HYPERURICEMIA AND EXACERBATIONS OF ARTICULAR
SYNDROME IN PATIENTS WITH GOUT
M. Gromova1
1Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow,
Russia
Objective: Throughout the year 69% of patients with gout experienced
repeated exacerbations during therapy aimed at reducing urate levels.
Therefore, proper prevention of articular syndrome exacerbations in acute
and chronic gout is very important. Prevention of arthritis exacerbations
with low dose NSAIDs should be done in the first 3-6 months of urate-
reducing therapy. This study aimed to assess the frequency of
exacerbations and quality of life in patients with gout after a 12 weeks
course of urate-reducing therapy with allopurinol in combination with the
anti-inflammatory drug meloxicam for the prevention of gout
exacerbations.
Methods: 143 patients with an established diagnosis of gout were
examined at an outpatient appointment. Physical examination was
performed in all patients with the calculation of anthropometric data
indicators (height, body weight, BMI), blood pressure (BP) levels during
visits. Clinical blood and urine tests, biochemical blood tests with
determination of the level of uric acid, creatinine, C-reactive protein
(CRP), instrumental diagnostics (electrocardiography). Information about
concomitant diseases was entered, drug therapy was recorded on moment
of the program. Allopurinol was administered orally, once a day. Every 3
weeks under the control of serum uric acid levels (sUA), the allopurinol
dosage was increased by 50 mg, up to 300 mg/d. The total daily dose of
meloxicam administered in different dosage forms was 7.5-15 mg. After 3,
6, 9 and 12 weeks, the clinical efficiency of treatment was assessed using
the EuroQol-5D-5L questionnaire, physical examination, joint pain
dynamics at rest, during movement and palpation, as well as the Likert
scale and visual analog scale (VAS) in mm. Factors such as the presence
of anxiety or depression, selfcare ability, normal daily activities of daily
living were taken into account, as well as their rating of their level of
satisfaction with the treatment on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is not an
improvement but a deterioration and 5 is a very good result. Both the period
of remission and the time before the onset of a recurrence of gouty arthritis
were taken into account, as well as adverse events (AEs) were recorded.
S127
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: Against the background of treatment with meloxicam 7.5 mg/d,
more than two-thirds of the patients did not experience a worsening of the
joint syndrome with an increase in the dose of allopurinol to 300 mg/d.
By the 12th week of follow-up, it was found that the characteristic
features of gouty arthritis significantly began to differ in improving
mobility, selfcare, habitual daily activities, reducing soreness, reducing
anxiety and depression (p<0.05). Moreover, the initial ESR and sUA
levels were significantly different from the follow-up endpoint (p<
0.05), indicating a positive effect on the inflammatory process. A 3-
month course of combination therapy did not cause a significant increase
in BP or change in serum creatinine clearance in the patients. From the
gastrointestinal tract there were no adverse events. 90.9% of patients
assessed the treatment efficiency as very good. AEs in the form of an
allergic skin rash were observed in one patient. But there was no need to
interrupt the treatment, as the rash completely disappeared without
consequences after completing the course of treatment with allopurinol
and meloxicam.
Conclusion: A 12-week combination therapy with allopurinol, a urate-
reducing drug, and meloxicam, an anti-inflammatory drug, prevents
exacerbation of joint syndrome and improves quality of life in patients
with gout.
P126
EXAMINATION OF LEAN MASS CONTENT IN TYPE 2
DIABETES MELLITUS PATIENTS USING DIFFERENT
HYPOGLYCEMIC DRUGS
L. Labashova1, P. Shepelkevich2, V. Dydyshka2
1Republic Centre of Medical Rehabilitation & Balneotherapy,
2Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus
Objective: Diabetes mellitus can be one of the reasons for the loss of
muscle mass. Since absolute muscle mass is strongly correlated with
height or weight, relative muscle mass -appendicular muscle mass
(AMM) indexes are used for sarcopenia diagnosis by DXA. The aim
was to examine lean body mass in postmenopausal women with type 2
diabetes depending on prescribed hypoglycemic drugs.
Methods: A sample of 75 postmenopausal women with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (53 women injected insulin and 22 women received oral
antidiabetic drugs (metformin+sulfonylurea) were recruited to the
research. Patients were matched for age (U=582.0; p=0.986), height
(U=545.0; p=0.662), weight (U=453.5; p=0.133), and BMI (U=444.5;
p=0.108). The age of the participants was 62.6 (59.6-66.4) y, BMI
32.7(29.3- 35.6) kg/m2. Lean mass was measured using DXA. AMM,
AMM in kg divided by height and BMI were calculated.
Results: We did not reveal the differences in the total amount of lean
mass in grams (U=524.0; p=0.496), regional distributional of lean mass:
trunk (U=538.0; p=0.604), android region (U=501.0; p=0.342), gynoid
region (U=576.5; p=0.944) in patients with different types of
hypoglycemic drugs. There were no significant differences in the AMM
(U=504.5; p=0.364) and calculated indices of the quantitative state of the
muscle component: AMM/height (U=479.0; p=0.228), AMM/BMI
(U=484.0; p=0.251).
Conclusion: Our study did not find any significant differences in lean
mass component in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus received
different hypoglycemic therapy.
P127
IMPACT OF CROSS HORMONAL THERAPY IN PATIENTS
WITH GENDER DYSPHORIA: FINAL RESULTS
D. C. Concha1, A. S. Sierra1, J. V. Vargas1, A. M. Medina1
1Hospital de San Jose - Fundación Ciencias de La Salud, Bogota,
Colombia
Objective: Hormone therapy is the main medical strategy for patients
facing gender transition. Cross hormone therapy, acts by suppressing
gonadal hormones and secondary sex characteristics of the biological
sex. The impact of long-term cross sex hormone therapy in the
transgender population is still unknown. We present an analysis in the
impact of hormone replacement therapy on BMD in patients with gender
incongruity who attend a program with a multidisciplinary approach in
Bogotá, Colombia. This study aimed to evaluate the impact of hormone
affirmation therapy on BMD in transgender patients in a center with a
multidisciplinary approach in Bogotá, Colombia.
Methods: A series of cases of patients with gender dysphoria of MTF
(transgender woman) and FTM (transgender man) is reported. Before the
start of hormone therapy, a bone densitometry was performed evaluating
the lumbar spine (LS), total hip (TH) and femoral neck (FN) BMD. A
year after the start of treatment a new BMD evaluation was carried out
using bone densitometry. The impact of the hormone therapy on BMD
was analyzed within the period of one year after its initiation by means of
the difference in BMD in g/cm2 and the change in the percentage in the
MTF and FTM group.
Results: In the FTM group there was an increase in BMD of 2.2% in the
lumbar spine and of 0.9% in the femoral neck. In the MTF group there
was a gain of 17% in the femoral neck. All the patients had normal T- and
Z-scores.
Conclusion: Cross hormone therapy in patients with gender dysphoria
has a positive impact in BMD.
P128
SCREENING CALCANEAL BONE MINERAL DENSITY
AMONG JORDANIAN WOMEN
R. Al-Ahmar1, A. Asma1, K. Abu Rouse1
1Jordanian Osteoporosis Prevention Society (JOPS), Amman, Jordan
Objective: Osteoporosis is the most common systemic skeleton illness
that is characterized by a reduction in bone density and increased risk of
fracture. The diagnostic sensitivity of ultrasound measurement of the
calcaneus in the prediction of hip fracture has been shown by recent large
prospective studies to be similar to hip BMD measured with DXA and
superior to spine BMD. For each standard deviation decrease in the
measurement, the risk of fracture increases approximately two-fold. The
aim of this study was to screen osteoporosis, osteopenia, and normal
BMD between different age groups of Jordanian women in different parts
of Jordan using a Hologic Sahara bone densitometer machine.
Methods: BMD of the calcaneal Jordanian Women screen had been
executed by the National Woman’s Health Care Centre in collaboration
with the Jordanian Osteoporosis Society (JOPS) through woman’s health
awareness campaign from 2014-2016 using an easy and painless
procedure; an osteoporosis screening measures the calcaneal T-score by
placing the (Lt) foot in a Hologic Sahara bone densitometer machine for
all ladies attended the campaign and were elder than 20 years.
Results: 776 women have been screened from different parts of Jordan,
their age was (20-87) years. Using estimated BMD by heel ultrasound,
few patients have T-scores below -2.5, whereas most women fall above
this level especially postmenopausal women.
Conclusion: The discrepancies in the prevalence of osteoporosis are the
result of several factors including differences in age-related bone loss,
some medication, and secondary to other diseases.
P129
REHABILITATION PROGRAM IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
PATIENTS DURING THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN
O. Fugaru1, D. Kamal2, C. Kamal1, O. Rogoveanu1, R. Traistaru1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2MedLife Clinic, Craiova,
Romania
S128
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: In 2020, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),
changed the entire providing rehabilitation medical services for
osteoarthritis patients. To minimize the rate of new infections and to
preserve medical resources, most rehabilitation programs in Romania
hospitals were postponed. The aim of this prospective randomized
controlled trial is to compare the outcomes of telerehabilitation program
and conventional treatment in patients with lower limb osteoarthritis (hip
and knee) during the COVID-19 lockdown.
Methods: Our study included 53 patients (aged 54-72 y, 25 females, 28
males), with known hip or knee osteoarthritis, who had been postponed
for inpatient rehabilitation program because of COVID-19. Between
April and June 2020, patients were randomly divided into experimental
group (26 patients underwent telerehabilitation program: conventional
treatment, educational measures, home web-based exercise program for
entire body, including respiratory and aerobic exercises) and control
group (27 patients) received only conventional treatment (usual analgesic
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and chondroprotector agents).
We chose easy scales to assess the outcomes – WOMAC index for
functional status and visual analogue scale for pain. All patients were
evaluated by telephone interviews during baseline, in the fourth and
eighth week.
Results: The pain in EG decreased compared with that in CG both at the
fourth week (p<0.003) and at the eighth week (p<0.05). The self-reported
WOMAC score in EG was significantly lower than that in the CG at the
fourth week (p<0.001), but not at the final (p>0.05). Patients over 65
years of age mentioned that the person which helps them to access the
web material was no longer available.
Conclusion: A decrease of physical activity in pandemic period is
associated with an increase in pain and loss of lower limb joint function.
Our results were in accordance with the demonstrated importance of
home exercise programs to decrease symptoms and improve daily
functioning during prolonged rest period. The best results were obtained
in subjects under 65 years old, so age is a real obstacle for
telerehabilitation in our patients.
P130
WEB-BASED EXERCISE PROGRAM IN THE OSTEOPOROTIC
FIBROMYALGIA FEMALES DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC
R. Traistaru1, C. Kamal1, D. Kamal2, A. M. Bumbea1, O. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2MedLife Clinic, Craiova,
Romania
Objective: The positive effects of an aerobic exercise in the
management of fibromyalgia (FM) patients with osteoporosis was
recognized. At present, the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic has significantly affected public health. As entire world,
in our country hospital facilities, are less accessible than usual. To
minimize the rate of new infections and to preserve medical
resources, most rehabilitation services in our country were
postponed.
Methods: A single blind randomized controlled trial was conducted to
evaluate home-training program efficacy in the treatment of females that
associated FM and postmenopausal osteoporosis. 42 licensed females
(average age 52.3 y). diagnosed with FM by ACR criteria and
postmenopausal osteoporosis (lumbar spine BMD T-score <-2.5 SD)
were recruited from our rehabilitation clinic database. Patients were
randomized into two groups: group 1 – 22 females (G1) underwent
telerehabilitation program: conventional treatment, educational measures,
home web-based exercise program for entire body, including respiratory,
resistive, weight bearing and aerobic exercises; group 2 – 20 females
control (G2), receiving only conventional treatment for osteoporosis
and analgetic drugs. We chose relative easy scales to assess the outcomes
– visual analogue scale (VAS) for pain, Spitzer scale for quality of life and
fibromyalgia impact questionnaire (FIQ). All patients were evaluated by
telephone interviews during baseline and after 6 weeks.
Results: Obtained data presented statistical differences between the
groups. The improvements were found after 6 weeks for FIQ (47.5%
in G1 and 29.5% in G 2, respectively) (p<0.05) and improvement in G1
was significantly higher than G2 (p<0.01). VAS scores for pain reduced
in all females; this reduction was significantly higher in G1. The Spitzer
scale also showed significant improvements in G1 group.
Conclusion: Home-training program, based on aerobic exercises, can
lead to long-term success in the management of females with FM and
osteoporosis, especially for quality of life and clinical status. Early
detection and implementation an aerobic training – resistive and
weight-bearing exercises, may be indicated in all postmenopausal
females with FM in special situation like present pandemic. Age is
not a barrier to the adoption of telerehabilitation in our licensed
patients.
P131
N E U R O P A T H I C
P A I N
I N
P R I M A R Y
K N E E
OSTEOARTHRITIS: COMPLETE MANAGEMENT
R. Traistaru1, D. Kamal2, A. M. Bumbea1, O. Fugaru1, C. Kamal1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2MedLife Clinic, Craiova,
Romania
Objective: Primary knee osteoarthritis (PKOA), a complex joint disease
causing pain and decreased function, is one of the leading causes of year
lost to disability worldwide. The recent documented presence of a
neuropathic component of pain in these patients has an important
negative impact on quality of life. In our study we investigated if
complete management (SpineDinamic daily, 1 tablet, 8 weeks and
rehabilitation program – educational measures, aerobic and
proprioceptive exercises, and magnetotherapy, three times a week)
influence neuropathic pain and functional status and improve quality of
life in PKOA.
Methods: We performed a prospective randomized controlled trial in
outpatient medicine clinic. 54 PKOA patients (aged 51-72 y, 35
females, 19 males, diagnosed as grade II and III KOA in accordance
with the Kellgren-Lawrence classification) were completely
evaluated before rehabilitation program, to exclude the potential
confounding comorbidities for neuropathic pain subphenotype, in
accordance with the updated ESCEO stepwise algorithm, and were
randomly divided into the experimental group (EG - underwent
complete management) and control group (CG) received only
rehabilitation program, without SpineDinamic therapy.
Improvements in pain (painDETECT questionnaire), knee function
(WOMAC questionnaire) and quality of life (Short Form-36 survey)
were compared. These outcomes were measured at baseline and
postrehabilitation. We used SPSS Statistics 22.0 for the data analysis.
Results: Parameters in both groups had an improving trend. The
painDETECT and WOMAC pain scores decreased significantly in the
EG compared to the CG (p<0.001 and p=0,003, respectively). The
WOMAC physical function and SF-36 scores were significantly
improved in EG. Between-group differences were statistically significant
postrehabilitation (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Our results sustained the well known benefit of
magnetotherapy and exercise program for clinical manifestations and
functional status in PKOA. Combining SpineDinamic therapy with
rehabilitation program might enhance both the altered pain perception
and quality of life in PKOA patients. Pain level and quality of life in
PKOA patients are deeply interconditioned and require both careful
assessment and complete management.
S129
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P132
IDENTIFICATION OF COMMON DIFFERENTIAL GENES
AND SEVERAL PROGNOSIS BIOMARKERS IN EWING
SARCOMA USING BIOINFORMATIC ANALYSIS
B. Liu1, Y. Xu1
1Dept. of Orthopedics, Clinical Center for Osteoporosis, the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Objective: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a highly aggressive tumor occurring
mainly in adolescents and young adults. The purpose of our study was to
identify candidate biomarkers of ES and uncover their potential molecular
mechanisms. Genetically, some genes play an important role in the
development of ES, however, the specific molecular mechanism and
pathogenesis are still unclear. Our study aims to identify candidate
biomarkers of ES using bioinformatic analysis.
Methods: The gene expression profiles of GSE45544 and GSE17674
were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database.
Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
pathway (KEGG) were used to analyze the functions and pathway
enrichment of the common differential genes based on Metascape online
tool. Subsequently, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was
constructed, and hub genes of the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) were identified by Cytoscape software. Finally, the prognostic
significance of each hub gene was performed by GEPIA.
Results: A total of 591 common DEGs were identified in ES, including
47 upregulated genes and 42 downregulated genes. GO analysis showed
that these DEGs were mainly enriched in cell division, chromatin binding
and response to antibiotic, while KEGG analysis revealed that all these
DEGs were mainly enriched in the pathways associated with cancer, such
as aldosterone-regulated sodium reabsorption and p53 signaling pathway.
In addition, PPI network was visualized by the Cytoscape software, and 6
of hub genes include TOP2A, BUB1B, NUSAP1, NCAPG, CDK1 and
ASPM showed worse disease-free survival in sarcoma patients.
Conclusion: TOP2A, BUB1B, NUSAP1, NCAPG, CDK1 and ASPM
may be potential biomarkers for the prognosis of ES, and provide
therapeutic targets for the development of drugs.
P133
BIOINFORMATIC ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENTIALLY
EXPRESSED GENES IN PRIMARY OSTEOPOROSIS
B. Liu1, Y. Xu1
1Dept. of Orthopedics, Clinical Center for Osteoporosis, the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Objective: To investigate the differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
related to the occurrence and development of osteoporosis (OP) as well
as screen out potential drug targets.
Methods: The microarray data concern osteoporosis were obtained from
GEO database and DEGs were identified by R statistical software. GO
and KEGG enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network analysis, and selection of hub genes were conducted.
Results: A total of 569 DEGs were screened out, 7 upregulated and 562
downregulated. At the same time, GO analysis of DEGs was mainly
enriched in processes such as pre-mRNA intronic binding, nuclear body,
histone modification, and mRNA 3’-end processing, while KEGG
analysis mainly involved the ubiquitin mediated proteolysis signal
pathway (hsa04120). By the calculation of the STRING database, we
obtained the PPI network, which consists of 517 nodes and 363 edges,
and the top 10 hub genes (TCEB1, CUL2, KBTBD6, KBTBD7, ASB8,
KLHL42, ASB5, FBXO11, ANAPC10, CDC23) of this study were
acquired by Cytoscape software.
Conclusion: The top 10 hub genes might help us understand the
pathophysiology of OP, even provide therapeutic targets for the
development of drugs. Meanwhile, it might provide some new ideas for
funding creative scientific hypotheses of OP.
P134
THE EFFECT OF IRON ACCUMULATION ON OSTEOBLAST
ACTIVITY AND MINERALIZATION THROUGH SLC7A11
J. J. Li1, Y. J. Xu1
1Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Objective: Iron accumulation affects the activity of osteoblasts, which
may be related to the production of ROS, but the detailed mechanism
remains to be further elucidated. The cystine/glutamate antiporter system
is embedded on the surface of the cell membrane and can transport cystine
into the cell and glutamate to the outside of the cell to play an antioxidant
role. SLC7A11 is an important subunit of this system. This study
explored the effect of iron accumulation through SLC7A11 on the
activity and mineralization of osteoblasts.
Methods: The osteoblast cell lines Saos-2 and MC3T3-E1 were used as
the research objects and were divided into two groups, one group was the
control group (Ctrl), and the other was the iron intervention group (FAC).
The control group did not do any treatment, and the FAC group was
cultured with osteoblast culture medium containing 200 μM ferric
ammonium citrate (FAC). After the intervention, mRNA expression
levels of osteoblast-specific genes (such as RUNX2, ALP, OCN, SP7,
OSX) and SLC7A11 were detected by quantitative reverse transcription
PCR (qRT-PCR), protein expression levels of osteoblast-specific genes
(such as Runx2, ALP, OCN, SP7, OSX) and SLC7A11 were detected by
western blotting, while using alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining to
detect osteoblast differentiation and alizarin red staining to detect the
mineralization ability of osteoblasts.
Results: Compared with the control group, the osteogenic specific genes
Runx2, ALP, OCN, SP7, OSX mRNA and protein expression in the FAC
group were significantly decreased, and the RNA and protein expression
of SLC7A11 were significantly decreased as well. The area of positive
areas stained with ALP and alizarin red was significantly reduced
compared with the control group.
Conclusion: Iron accumulation can significantly affect the activity and
mineralization of osteoblasts, which may affect the function of osteoblasts
by inhibiting the expression of SLC7A11.
P135
MECHANISM OF PILOSE ANTLER IN TREATMENT OF
OSTEOPOROSIS BASED ON NETWORK PHARMACOLOGY
B. Liu1, Y. Xu1
1Dept. of Orthopedics, Clinical Center for Osteoporosis, the Second
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Objective: To demonstrate the pharmacodynamic material basis and
molecular mechanism of pilose antler (PA) in the prevention and
treatment of osteoporosis (OP) by the method of network pharmacology.
Methods: First, the active components of PA were screened by
BATMAN-TCM database, and the components targets were obtained
from the SwissTargetPrediction online tool. Moreover, the relevant target
genes of OP were obtained by searching the DisGeNET database.
Second, a Venn diagram was drawn to obtain the PA-OP common
targets, as well as the protein–protein interaction (PPI) network and
drug-components-targets (D-C-T) network were constructed by
Cytoscape software. Last, the GO functional annotation and KEGG
pathway enrichment analysis of common targets were performed using
the Metascape online tool.
Results: A total of 14 candidate components of PA and 320 targets were
identified, as well as 1098 targets associated with OP were predicted.
S130
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Subsequently, 82 common targets were identified by generating a Venn
diagram. The PPI network of 82 common targets indicated that the top 5
nodal targets, including PIK3CA, MAPK1, ESR1, AKT1 and SRC were
strongly associated with other proteins. The D-C-T network suggested
that the active components with high degree of connectivity include
prostaglandin E1, 17-β-estradiol, α-estradiol and oestrone.
Furthermore, the GO enrichment analysis revealed that the biological
process categories were dominated by response to peptide, cellular
response to lipid, regulation of MAPK cascade, and so on.
Additionally, the KEGG pathway analysis indicated the estrogen
signaling pathway, osteoclast differentiation, and HIF-1 signaling
pathway might have critical effects on the development of OP.
Conclusion: The results provide certain scientific basis for the research
on the mechanism of OP prevention and treatment by PA.
P136
IMPACT OF ARNTL KNOCKDOWN ON OSTEOBLAST
ACTIVITY AND ITS MECHANISM
J. J. Li1, Y. J. Xu1
1Soochow University, Suzhou, China
Objective: The circadian rhythm is an endogenous oscillating mechanism
that regulates a variety of cellular processes, including iron metabolism,
oxidative stress, and cell death. ARNTL is the core component of
mammalian biological clock which regulates the expression of other
biological clock controlling genes. This study preliminarily explores the
effect of ARNTL gene on osteoblast activity and possible mechanism.
Methods: Human osteoblast cell line Saos-2 was divided randomly into
three groups: control (Ctrl), negative control (NC) and ARNTL
knockdown (ARNTL-/-). No treatment was done in the Ctrl group, the
NC group was transfected with siRNA-NC, and the ARNTL-/- group was
transfected with siRNA-ARNTL. After 24 h of transfection, knockdown
efficiency of ARNTL was detected by quantitative reverse transcription
PCR (qRT-PCR). Proliferation ability of osteoblasts was detected by Cell
Counting Kit 8 (CCK8). Malondialdehyde (MDA) content was detected
by lipid oxidation detection kit. The mRNA expression level of
osteoblast-specific genes (such as Runx2, ALP, OCN, SP7, OSX) and
ferroptosis related genes (PTGS2, GPX4) was detected by qRT-PCR, and
the protein expression levels of osteoblast specific genes (such as Runx2,
ALP, OCN, SP7, OSX) and ferroptosis related genes (PTGS2, GPX4)
were detected by western blotting.
Results: Compared with the control group, there was no significant
difference in the expression of ARNTL mRNA in the NC group. The
expression of ARNTL mRNA in the ARNTL-/- group was significantly
decreased. The CCK8 test results indicated that the proliferation ability of
osteoblast in ARNTL-/- group was significantly weakened. The MDA
level was significantly increased. The ferroptosis related PTGS2 mRNA
and protein expression was increased, GPX4 and osteoblast specific
genes (such as Runx2, ALP, OCN, SP7, OSX) mRNA and protein
expression were decreased.
Conclusion: After the ARNTL gene of osteoblasts was successfully
knocked down, the activity of osteoblasts was significantly reduced,
and the ferroptosis markers changed significantly. The ARNTL gene
may affect the function and activity of osteoblasts through the ferroptosis
mechanism.
P137
EFFECTS OF ADHERENCE TO TREATMENT ON MINERAL
BONE DENSITY GROWTH (3-YEAR RESEARCH STUDY)
A. Trushyna1, V. Spesivtseva2, N. Bashlakova3
1Belarusian State Medical University, 2City Clinical Hospital #10,
3Belarusian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Minsk,
Belarus
Objective: To determine the dependence of the increase of BMD on
patients’ adherence to treatment during long-term therapy.
Methods: The viewed group: 102 women with postmenopausal
osteoporosis (PMO) age 59±4.6 years old took alendronate for 2 or more
years with no medication change. The viewed group therapy regimen:
alendronate 70 mg/week taken with calcium 1000 mg/d and vitamin D
800 IU/d. Research methods: DXA (once a year), test for patient
compliance evaluation (once every 3 months for 3 y).
Results: After 1 year of treatment an increase in lumbar spine BMD by
+0.048 (+0.028; +0.074) was detected at +5.99 (+3.46; +9.11)% (p<0.001).
With high adherence to treatment (MPR >80%), the increase was
significant and reliable during the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd years of alendronate
treatment (p<0.001), and with low adherence to treatment, the increase was
significant, but not reliable during both the 1st (p=0.128) and the 2nd years
of treatment (p=0.023). After 1 y of treatment the increase in BMD of the
femoral neck with high adherence to treatment was not reliable +0.023 (+
0.002; +0.046). Only provided that high adherence (MPR >80%) was
maintained over 2 y of alendronate treatment, the increase in BMD of the
femoral neck was both significant and reliable +0.032 (+0.012; +0.050)
g/cm2, which amounted to +4.34 (+1.47; +6.67)% (p<0.001).
Conclusion: Alendronate intake for 1 y with high adherence to treatment
(MPR >80%) causes a significant increase in lumbar spine BMD. The
increase in BMD of the femoral neck after 1 y of alendronate intake with
high adherence is not reliable. With high adherence to treatment, the
increase in BMD of the lumbar spine was significant and reliable during
the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd years of treatment with alendronate intake. Only
provided that high adherence to treatment is maintained for 2 y, the
increase in BMD of the femoral neck while alendronate intake becomes
significant and reliable.
P138
H O W
L O N G
T O
T A K E
A L E N D R O N A T E
I N
POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS? (5-YEAR RESEARCH
STUDY)
A. Trushyna1, V. Spesivtseva2, N. Bashlakova3
1Belarusian State Medical University, 2City Clinical Hospital #10,
3Belarusian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Minsk,
Belarus
Objective: To determine the necessary duration of alendronate intake to
achieve a sustained increase in BMD in postmenopausal osteoporosis
(PMO).
Methods: The viewed group: 102 women with PMO age 59±4.6 years
old took alendronate for 2 or more years with no medication change.
Exclusion criterion: other diseases causing osteoporosis (OP). The control
group: 32 women without OP, comparable in age with the main group.
The viewed group therapy regimen: alendronate 70 mg/week taken with
calcium 1000 mg/d and vitamin D 800 IU/d. The control group patients
(pt) took as much Ca and vitamin. D as the main group. Research
methods: DXA (once a year), test for pt compliance evaluation (once
every 3 months for 5 y).
Results: After 1 y of treatment an increase in lumbar spine BMD by
+0.048 (+0.028;+0.074) was detected at +5.99 (+3.46; +9.11)%
(p<0.001). The increase in BMD of the femoral neck is not reliable.
After 3 y an increase in lumbar spine BMD by +0.072 g/cm2 (+8.51%),
р<0.001 was detected, the BMD increase in the 2nd and 3rd years
together was lower than its increase in 1st year alone. 3 years of treatment
caused an increase in femur BMD (p<0.01) for pt with PMO, the BMD
increase in the 2nd and 3rd years together was lower than its increase in
1st year alone. The increase in BMD of the femoral neck in the 1st, 3rd
and 5th years is uncertain because it does not exceed the densitometer
error level (±0.012 g/cm2). 5 y of treatment with no medication change
cause an increase in lumbar spine BMD (p<0.001), the BMD increase in
the 4th and 5th years together is not reliable.
S131
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: 3-y alendronate treatment is proved to increase lumbar spine
BMD and femoral BMD. There was no increase in BMD of the femoral
neck while taking alendronate over 5 y. Further treatment (5 y with no
medication change) does not lead to a further increase in the density of
BMD in all studied regions but to a decrease in the number of spinal and
distal fractures.
P139
CAN THE LIMITING OF KNEE ARTHROPLASTY TO
IMPROVE THE PROGNOSIS IN PATIENTS WITH
OSTEOARTHRITIS?
A. Tkachenko1, I. Urazovskaya1, Y. Dorofeev2, V. Khaydarov1, D.
Mansurov1, A. Spichko3
1North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov, Saint-
Petersburg, 2Scandinavia Ava-Peter Clinic Attentive Medicine, Saint-
Petersburg, 3Clinic of Traumatology & Orthopedics Republican
Hospital V.A. Baranova, Petrozavodsk, Russia
Objective: The number of total knee arthroplasty (TKA) increase
annually. In fact, the number of patients who are not satisfied with the
results of arthroplasty also increase. The aim of this study was to analyze
the functional outcomes and quality of life in patients with osteoarthritis
(OA) who underwent TKA from 2008-2017.
Methods: We identified primary TKAs performed for noninflammatory
arthritis in 1698 patients between 2008-2017. The outcomes of TKA
assessed according to Oxford Knee Score (OKS) and the WHO Quality
of life (WHOQOL). We received 1451 (85.4%) fully completed
questionnaires.
Results: Among 1451 patients with OA only 1291(89.0%) patients had
the excellent and good OKS results in 1 y after TKA. The same results
after 2 y had 1240 (85.5%) of patients and only 1207 (83.2%) in 3 y after
TKA and 78.3% patients in 4 y after TKA. Overall, 74.3% of patients
have good and excellent results and were satisfied with their ability to
perform normal daily living activities in 5 y after TKA. Conversely, the
number of patients dissatisfied with the results of TKA according to OKS
increases from 11% to 25.7% within 5 y. The results of WHOQOL were
comparable to the results of OKS.
Conclusion: In the future we can have the situation, when the quantity of
patients with excellent and good results according to OKS (0-39 points)
will be comparable with patients with satisfied and dissatisfied results of
TKA (40-60 points). The 71 (28.1% between 253) patients with satisfied
and dissatisfied results had preoperative pain of low intensity and OA
(Kellgren-Lawrence radiologic stage II-III) before TKA had no
conservative treatment. Based on the receiving data we cannot exclude
the fact that operation was early performed. More research is needed to
explain this issue.
P140
VIEWS, BARRIERS, AND FACILITATORS OF PHARMACISTS
REGARDING THE NEED FOR A FRACTURE LIAISON
SERVICE IN A TERTIARY TEACHING HOSPITAL IN
MALAYSIA
M. H. Cheah1, P. S. M. Lai1, T. Ong1
1University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Objective: To explore the views, barriers, and facilitators of pharmacists
regarding the need for a Fracture Liaison Service (FLS) in the University
Malaya Medical Centre (UMMC).
Methods: This qualitative study was conducted from February to April
2021 in the UMMC. Pharmacists working in the outpatient, inpatient and
drug information centre were recruited via purposive sampling to ensure
maximum variation. Provisional registered pharmacists were excluded.
Semistructured in-depth interviews were conducted using a topic guide
until thematic saturation was achieved. Data were transcribed verbatim
and analysed using thematic analysis.
Results: Eight pharmacists with 2-16 y of working experience were
recruited. Three themes emerged from our data: views regarding 1)
secondary fracture prevention; 2) the implementation of FLS; and 3) role
of the FLS coordinator. Pharmacists recognised the importance of
secondary fracture prevention as fracture begets fracture. All pharmacists
agreed that FLS should be implemented in the UMMC to improve
secondary fracture prevention management to reduce refracture rates.
However, most pharmacists have never heard of the term “FLS”. They
perceived that the functions of FLS were to ensure that patients received
the care required for secondary fracture prevention by coordinating the
care provided between departments and to ensure continuity of care.
Patient education should be provided as part of the FLS. In order for
FLS to be successful and sustainable, a dedicated coordinator should be
appointed, and support from the relevant stakeholders including doctors,
nurses, pharmacists, rehabilitation team, and policymakers is needed.
Development of local guidelines can help to improve FLS awareness
among stakeholders. Ideally, any healthcare professional can become a
FLS coordinator; however, pharmacists have the advantage as a FLS
coordinator in terms of knowledge in medications, but the shortage of
manpower might be a barrier.
Conclusion: Most pharmacists have never heard of a FLS, but agreed that
there was a need for FLS in the UMMC to improve the delivery of
secondary fracture prevention. They believed that they were sufficiently
qualified to be the FLS coordinator, but were concerned regarding the
lack of manpower.
P141
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY
AND OUTCOME OF COVID-19 PATIENTS
C. Zidrou1, M. Tsatlidou1, A. Vasiliadis1, S. Vogiatzis2, A. Beletsiotis1
12nd Orthopaedic Dept., 2Pneumonological Dept. of G. Papagergiou
General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece
Objective: Infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) poses an enormous challenge to health
care systems throughout the world. Without causal treatment,
identification of modifiable prognostic factors may help to improve
outcomes. The purpose of our study is to explore possible associations
of vitamin D (VitD) status with disease severity and survival.
Methods: We studied 165 patients diagnosed with coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) and treated at our center. VitD status at first
presentation was assessed retrospectively using accredited laboratory
methods. VitD deficiency was defined as serum total 25-
hydroxyvitamin D level <12 ng/mL (<30 nM). Primary endpoint was
severe course of disease (i.e., need for invasive mechanical ventilation
and/or death, IMV/D).
Results: Within a median observation period of 66 d (range 2-92), 21
patients required IMV. A total of 28 patients had IMV/D, including 16
deaths. 84 (50.9%) patients required hospitalization (inpatient subgroup).
A total of 45 (27.2%) patients were VitD deficient. When adjusted for
age, gender, and comorbidities, VitD deficiency was associated with
higher risk of IMV/D and death (HR 6.11, 95%CI 2.78-13.43, p<0.001
and HR 14.69, 95%CI 4.17-51.89, p<0.001, respectively). Similar
correlations were observed in the inpatient subgroup.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrates an association between VitD
deficiency and severity/mortality of COVID-19, highlighting the need
for interventional studies on VitD supplementation in SARS-CoV-2
infected individuals.
S132
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P142
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POLYPHARMACY AND
FALLS IN ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH HIP FRACTURE
C. Zidrou1, A. Vasiliadis1, M. Tsatlidou1, A. Beletsiotis1
12nd Orthopaedic Dept., G. Papageorgiou General Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Greece,
Objective: Polypharmacy and fall-risk increasing drugs (FRIDS) have
been associated with injurious falls. FRIDS are classified into two groups:
those which are associated with a high risk of falling (antipsychotics,
anxiolytics, hypnotics and sedatives, antidepressants, and dopaminergic
agents) and those considered as associated with a low and moderate risk
of falling (opioids, vasodilators used in cardiac diseases,
antihypertensives, diuretics, beta blocking agents, calcium channel
blockers, agents acting on the renin-angiotensin system, α-
adrenoreceptor antagonists). The purpose of this study is to measure the
prevalence of polypharmacy and use of FRIDS (by pharmacological
group and by total number) at discharge in patients older than 65 y
hospitalized due to a hip fracture in an Orthopaedic Dept. In addition,
we aim to explore what patient’s characteristics may be associated with
polypharmacy and FRIDS prevalence.
Methods: This study describes the baseline findings of a 5-y
retrospective cohort study (from January 2016 to December 2020). We
included 478 patients older than 65 y discharged from an Orthopaedic
Unit who were able to walk before surgery. Patient’s baseline variables,
total number of drugs, and FRIDS at hospital discharge were collected.
Results: The mean number of drugs and FRIDS prescribed at discharge
was 11.2±3.0 and 2.8±1.5, respectively. Polypharmacy was prevalent in
all patients except in four: 22.9% (5-9 drugs) and 75.3% (≥10 drugs).
Only 13 patients had no FRIDS and 35.7% were on >3 FRIDS. The most
prevalent FRIDS were agents acting on the renin angiotensin system
(42.9%) and anxiolytics (38.7%). The number of FRIDS was higher in
patients with extreme polypharmacy (3.3±1.4) than in those on 5-9 drugs
(1.6±1.0, p<0.05). Independent people in performing instrumental
activities had lower risk of extreme polypharmacy (≥10 drugs) or >3
FRIDS: OR 0.39 (95%CI 0.18-0.83) and OR 0.41 (95%CI 0.20-0.84),
respectively. People living in a nursing home had higher risk of >3
FRIDS: OR 4.02 (95%CI 1.12-14.53).
Conclusion: Polypharmacy and FRIDS are prevalent in patients
discharged from orthopaedic care after surgery for a hip fracture.
Interventions on drug use at hospital discharge could have a potential
impact on falls in this high risk population.
P143
EFFECT OF SURGERY ON CARDIAC STRUCTURE AND
FUNCTION IN MILD PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
C. Zidrou1, A. Beletsiotis1
12nd Orthopaedic Dept., G. Papageorgiou General Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Greece,
Objective: The cardiovascular (CV) risk profile is worsened in
primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT), and CV mortality is related
to serum calcium levels. It is unknown whether CV mortality is
increased in the most common form of PHPT and whether the
increased CV risk is reversible after surgery. The purpose of this
study is to investigate the morbidity of parathyroidectomy compared
with observation without operation in patients with mild primary
hyperparathyroidism. Furthermore, the study researches for
recording simultaneously reversibility of echocardiographic changes
in mild primary hyperparathyroidism after surgery treatment.
Methods: From January 2012 to December 2019, 30 patients were
involved, of which 15 were randomized to observation (1st subgroup)
and 15 for parathyroidectomy (2nd subgroup).
The inclusion criteria were mild PHPT without the appearance of
symptoms, corrected calcium levels for albumin between 2.60-2.85
mmol/l, age between 50-80 y, without taking other drugs that affect
calcium metabolism. At baseline and after 2 y, a biochemist and
echocardiographic control was conducted.
Results: In the 2-y follow-up, the corrected calcium levels and those of
PTH were significantly lower in the 2nd subgroup. Instead, there seemed
no significant differences in blood pressure, heart rate, BMI,
inflammatory markers, cholesterol and other cardiovascular risk markers.
The echocardiography did not show significant differences between
subgroups in heart function and dimensions, except a marginal reduction
in left ventricular mass and the mass ratio of the left ventricle in the 2nd
subgroup, suggesting reversibility of left ventricular hypertrophy even in
mild PHPT. Simultaneously, to the 2nd subgroup, a decrease of septum
size was found. Unlike other studies, no correlation was observed
between vitamin D and echocardiographic variables.
Conclusion: It is safe to observe without surgery patients with mild
PHPT for a few years and suggest that longer follow-up may yield larger
and clinically important differences.
P144
DEVELOPMENT, VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY OF A
REFERRAL FORM FOR SARCOPENIA ASSESSMENT IN
STANDARD CLINICAL PRACTICE
Y. El Miedany1, M. Toth2, M. El Gaafary3, M. Hassan4, A.
Elshanawany5, N. Fathi6, H. Abozaid7, M. Eissa8, N. Ahmed9, N.
Gadallah10, S. Galal10, W. Hassan11
1King's College, London, UK, 2Darent Valley Hospital, Dartford, UK,
3Community & Public Health Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt,
4Rheumatology & Rehabilitation Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt,
5Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Menofeya University, Menofeya,
Egypt, 6Rheumatology & Rehabilitation Assiut University, Assiut,
Egypt, 7Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Sohag University, Sohag,
Egypt, 8Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt, 9Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Fayoum University, Fayoum,
Egypt, 10Rheumatology, Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Ain Shams
University, Cairo, Egypt, 11Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Benha
University. On behalf of the Egyptian Academy Bone Health and
Metabolic Bone Diseases, Benha, Egypt.
Objective: Diagnosis of sarcopenia requires quantitative and qualitative
measurement of muscle mass as well as assessment for underlying
aetiology. Early detection of sarcopenia can prevent downstream adverse
health outcomes. Since sarcopenia is asymptomatic, particularly in its
early stage, the development of an effective screening tool is vital to
identify those patients at risk and in the meantime can be used to refer
this cohort, suspected to have sarcopenia, for body composition
valuation. Currently, the gold standard in measurement is highly
debatable. It is unlikely that a single test which examines only 1 parameter
will be adopted as the standard tool to assess for sarcopenia. Furthermore,
the tool should be cheap, easy to use and has high predictive value. Aims:
1. To develop a screening tool that can be used to identify older adults
who are at risk of developing sarcopenia; 2. To assess its validity,
reproducibility as well as comprehensibility as a referral form for body
composition assessment using DXA scanning.
Methods: The screening form was based on the EWGSOP recommended
definition for sarcopenia which is based on: low muscle strength, low
muscle quantity or quality and low physical performance. The developed
tool included a combination of SARC-F questionnaire, scores of grip
strength and chair stand test as a measure of muscle strength, as well as
4-m walk gait speed test as a measure of physical performance. In
addition, the screening tool included the mini-nutrition assessment short
form (MNA-SF) for malnourishment and falls risk assessment (FRAS).
As DXA is used as a measure of muscle quality, the validity of the model
S133
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
was assessed by comparing the results of the scale to the results of the
appendicular lean mass adjusted for BMI (ALM/BMI). 67 patients with
suspected sarcopenia (52.2% females, 47.8% males) were assessed. 68
healthy subjects of matched sex and age were included as a control group.
The comprehensibility and reproducibility of the model were also
assessed.
Results: The developed model was a combination of questionnaires,
anthropometric measures, and physical function tests. Using the ALM/
BMI as standard reference, the combined model scores suggestive of
sarcopenia, showed enhanced sensitivity (86.7%) with a resultant
increase in screening performance compared to individual tools, such as
SARC-F, with AUROC, 0.892; 95%CI, 0.86-0.92; P=0.018. The
specificity and negative predictive value were, respectively, 98.9% and
97.6% in men and 95.8% and 96.8% in women. Reproducibility of the
overall questionnaire and individual domains was excellent (Spearman-
Brown index, 0.94-0.98). All the patients rated the form as quite
comprehensible or extremely comprehensible. Comprehensibility
percentage was 96.8%.
Conclusion: Results revealed clearly that while each tool may reliably
exclude subjects without sarcopenia, they may not be effective in
screening for the condition, particularly in asymptomatic older adults.
The consistent association between the diagnosis of sarcopenia and
clinically significant outcomes such as decline in physical performance,
nutrition status and increased falls risk, endorses their combined efficacy
as screening tools. The developed model was effective, reliable and well
validated referral instrument with improved diagnostic accuracy. The
advent of pharmacological treatment and evidence-based management
such as exercise and nutrient supplementation have helped sarcopenia
screening gain prominence.
P145
O S T E O P O R O S I S
T R E A T M E N T
F O L L O W I N G
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES: DATA FROM A SINGLE
MEDICAL CENTER
O. Tell-Lebanon1, R. H. Rosenblum2, E. Yaccobi3, N. Ohana4, O.
Twito5, P. Rotman-Pikielny5
1Metabolic Bone Diseases Service, Endocrine Institute, Meir Medical
Center, Kfar Saba 2Metabolic Bone Diseases Service, Endocrine
Institute, Meir Medical Center, Kfar Saba, 3Orthopedic Dept., Meir
Medical Center affiliated with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, 4Orthopedic Dept., Meir Medical Center affiliated
with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
5Metabolic Bone Diseases Service, Endocrine Institute, Meir Medical
Center affiliated with Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Tel Aviv, Israel
Objective: Most postosteoporotic fracture patients do not receive
osteoporosis treatment, although it reduces risks for additional fractures.
This retrospective, observational study reviewed osteoporosis evaluation
and treatment following typical osteoporotic fractures.
Methods: We identified patients with hip, vertebral, humerus or radius
fractures, examined in Meir Medical Center, January-December 2017.
Exclusion criteria were: not a Clalit Health Services member, high energy
or pathologic fracture, or 30-d postoperative mortality. Primary endpoint
was osteoporosis drugs issued within 12 months of fracture. Secondary
endpoints were bone density testing and mortality.
Results: Of 928 patients diagnosed, 346 (37%) were excluded. 582
(78.6±11.1 y of age, 75.8% women) were included: 321 (55.5%) hip,
84 (14.1%) humerus, 33 (5.6%) vertebra, 144 (24.7%) radius. Hip
fracture patients were older, with more previous fractures.
Osteoporosis drugs were issued to 26.5%; humerus fracture received
the least (21.4%) and vertebral fracture, the most (30.3%), p=0.51.
Treatment related to age, gender or previous fracture, was similar.
Bone density testing was done in 23.2% of patients, with vertebra
(39.4%) and radius (34%) the most. One-year mortality after hip
fracture was 12.1%, with humerus (3.6%), vertebral (3%) and radius
(1.4%) (p=0.0). Logistic regression demonstrated that previous
treatment (OR=7.4, 95%CI 3.6-15.2), bone density testing (OR=4.4,
95%CI 2.6-7.4) and endocrinology visit (OR=2.6, 95%CI=1.4-4.6)
were the most significant discriminating factors associated with
osteoporosis treatment.
Conclusion: Fewer than one-third of patients received pharmacotherapy
within a year postfracture. Since pharmacotherapy reduces future
fractures and mortality, we encourage medical staff, including orthopedic
surgeons, rehabilitation team and general practitioners to increase
awareness of their importance.
P146
URBAN-RURAL DIFFERENCES IN PATIENTS WITH
OSTEOARTHRITIS
K. S. Skrame1, E. Z. Zaimi2, E. P. Petrela3
1Kamel Farma, 2UHC Mother Teresa, Emergency Dept., 3UHC Mother
Teresa, Dept. of Statistics, Tirana, Albania
Objective: Osteoarthritis, the most common form of arthritis, is a
disabling chronic disease with significant clinical and economic
implications (1–6). The most important risk factors for osteoarthritis
include age, sex, obesity, and trauma (6–10). With aging and obesity
trends, the incidence and prevalence of osteoarthritis is expected to rise
in the world, increasing the demand for health resources. The pain caused
by this pathology is the main complaint of most patients, prompting them
to seek medical attention (11). Although osteoarthritis is considered a non-
inflammatory arthritis, where mechanical causes play a major role,
inflammatory mechanisms may be present. Our goal is to analyze rural-
urban differences, in patients with osteoarthritis.
Methods: The study included all consecutive patients diagnosed with
osteoarthritis, hospitalized in the Rheumatology Service at QSUT
Mother Teresa, in the period of January 2010 to December 2015, using
diagnostic codes.
Results: We analyzed 589 cases, where 79% (n=464) were female and
20% (n=118) lived in rural areas. The average age of patients in rural
areas is significantly younger than the average age of patients in urban
areas (respectively 53.41±10.53 and 56.01±10.13 y, p=0.013). The most
commonly affected joint in the rural population is the knee (52.3 vs.
39.4% in urban areas, p=0.044), followed by the hip (19.8 vs. 18.6%,
p=0.238) and the least affected is the hand joint (18.7% vs. 33.3%,
p=0.052). Overweight was found more in the rural population (41.7%
urban vs. 31% rural, p=0.011).
Conclusion: Lifestyle is an important factor, which contributes to
osteoarthritis. Putting in the movements of the joints of the hands
significantly reduces the presence of pain.
References:
1.
Marshall DA, et al. Arthritis Care Res 2015;67:1379.
2.
Finlayson G, et al. The additional cost of chronic disease in
Manitoba. Winnipeg (Canada): Manitoba Centre for Health
Policy; 2010.
3.
Kopec JA, et al. J Rheumatol 2007;34:386.
4.
Kopec JA, et al. Arthritis Rheum 2008;59:929.
5.
Kopec JA, et al. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2010;18:303.
6.
Srikanth V, et al. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2005;13:769.
7.
Anderson SA, Loeser RF. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
2010;24:15.
8.
Woolf A, Pfleger B. Bull World Health Organ 2003;81:646.
9.
Felson DT, et al. Ann Int Med 2000;133:635.
10.
Zhang Y, Jordan JM. Clin Geriatr Med 2010;26:355.
11.
Hunter DJ, et al. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2002;20:93.
S134
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P147
SONOGRAPHIC PECULIARITIES OF HIP JOINT
DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN OF THE FIRST YEAR OF
LIFE
V. Zinchenko1, M. Kabatsy1, O. Gayko2
1State Institution “Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics National
Academy of Medical Science of Ukraine”, Dept. of Joint Diseases in
Children & Adolescents, 2State Institution “Institute of Traumatology
and Orthopedics National Academy of Medical Science of Ukraine”,
Diagnostics Dept., Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: To evaluate the hip morphology of children using the
ultrasound according to Graf’s technique. To investigate the development
of the femoral head ossification centre and the hip joint acetabulum of
children of the first year of life.
Methods: The study included 1549 children (600 boys and 949 girls)
ranging from 5 days to 12 months of age and also 812 children (413 boys
and 399 girls) aged from 10-15 days old. The children were scanned
according to Graf’s technique.
Results: We have received the following distribution on the types
according to Graf: Ia, Ib 40.48%; IIa+ 8.39; IIa- 9.49%; IIb 34.7%; IIc
2.55%; D 2.87%; IIIa, IIIb 1.42%; IV 0.1%. In our research we were
taking the alpha angle for the analysis. The alpha angle allows
conclusions to be drawn about the potential for the ossification in the
acetabular roof. The acetabular roof of hip joint in our investigation
shows an enormous potential in the first 2 months of life, which is still
present to 6 months period but reduces after 6 months and approaches a
level by 10 months with very little movement thereafter. The significant
difference of the alpha angle average values of the infant hip among
newborn children born in different seasons was revealed. The alpha angle
average value was distinctly bigger among the infants who were born in
spring and summer months than among those who were born in winter
and autumn. The statistical confidence of differences of the alpha angle
average values between the newborn boys and girls who were born in the
same season (p<0.05) was revealed. The femoral head ossification center
in girls appears earlier than in boys (p<0.05).
Conclusion: The data received as the result of the statistical analysis
indicate the statistical confidence of differences of the femoral head
ossification centre and the hip joint acetabulum development between
the boys and girls (p<0.05). The unusual observation that there is a
seasonal element in the development of the hip joint was received.
P148
SARCOPENIA AND FALL-RELATED INJURY AMONG OLDER
ADULTS IN FIVE LOW AND MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES
N. Veronese1, L. Smith2, M. Barbagallo1, A. Koyanagi3
1University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 2Anglia Ruskin University,
Cambridge, UK, 3Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Objective: Sarcopenia is a common condition in older people and
increasing evidence suggests that it can be considered as a potential risk
factor for falls and fractures. However, no studies on this topic from low
and middle income countries (LMICs) are available. Thus, we assessed
this association among older adults from five LMICs (China, India,
Ghana, Mexico, and Russia).
Methods: Community-based, nationally representative, cross-sectional
data of the Study on Global Aging and Adult Health were analyzed.
Sarcopenia was defined as the presence of low skeletal muscle mass
based on indirect population formula, and either slow gait or low hand
grip strength. The presence of fall-related injury was ascertained through
selfreported information. Multivariable logistic regression analysis and
meta-analysis were conducted.
Results: The sample consisted of 13,101 individuals aged ≥65 y (mean
(SD) age 72.6 (11.3) y; 45% males). The prevalence of fall-related injury
was higher among those with sarcopenia than in those without this
condition (e.g., Mexico 9.8% vs. 2.7%). Adjusted analyses showed that
sarcopenia was associated with a 1.85 (95%CI=1.24-2.77) times higher
odds for fall-related injury, with a low level of between-country
heterogeneity.
Conclusion: Sarcopenia is associated with a significant higher odds of
fall-related injury in LMICs. Future studies of longitudinal design may
shed light on whether sarcopenia in LMICs may be considered as a risk
factor for falls.
P149
OSTEOPOROSIS: PREVALENCE, AWARENESS AND
PERTINENT RISK FACTORS IN A COHORT OF ELDERLY
ASIAN POPULATION PRESENTING WITH LOW-ENERGY
DISTAL RADIUS FRACTURES
M. Muzzammil1
1Sindh Gov Services Hospital Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan
Objective: To evaluate the awareness of osteoporosis and related risk
factors in elderly Asian patients who present with distal radius fractures.
The distal radius fracture is one of the most frequent fractures in the
elderly cohort, owing to osteoporosis, and may be a harbinger for further
fractures, however, data is scarce regarding awareness of this condition
among these patients.
Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted on patients aged ≥45
that presented in the emergency department with low-energy distal radial
fractures in Karachi from January-December 2018. Data were collected
via a selfdesigned questionnaire, assessing the demographic information,
knowledge about osteoporosis and its risk factors. The data were analyzed
using SPSS 20 for statistical significance.
Results: From a total of 550 patients with a mean age of 70.5±32.82 y,
there were 442(80.36%) females and 108(19.63%) males. On educational
consideration, 243(44.18%) patients could not read or write and only
110(20%) of the patients received secondary school education. Only
123(22.36%) were well informed about osteoporosis, the predominant
source of information being their physician. There were 427(77.63%)
patients who were unaware of osteoporosis, 16% of which were smokers,
26% indicated they exercised at least 30 min daily, and 2% reported
drinking alcohol occasionally. On dietary supplements, 24.27% of
patients reported calcium and 17.81% reported vitamin D supplement
consumption on regular basis.
Conclusion: We found a positive correlation between a patient’s
education status and osteoporosis awareness. We believe that the role of
the physician could be crucial in preventing further fractures in such
patients via physician lead educational campaigns to target modifiable
risk factors.
P150
25-HYDROXYVITAMIN D CONCENTRATION, PTH, AND
PREVALENT VERTEBRAL FRACTURE IN JAPANESE HIP
FRACTURE PATIENTS
A. Kanno1, T. Aizawa2
1Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Japan Community Health Care
Organization Sendai South Hospital, Sendai, 2Dept. of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Iwaki City Medical Center, Iwaki, Japan
Objective: To evaluate the level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) in
Japanese hip fracture patients and to evaluate the relationships between
concentration of 25(OH)D and PTH, the number of moderate or severe
prevalent vertebral fractures.
Methods: The study subjects were 310 patients (62 men, 248 women) who
sustained hip fracture due to a fall from a standing position, or due to events
of lower energy trauma, between April 2017 and May 2020. The average
S135
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
age at the time of injury was 84.8 y (67-98 years). 25(OH)D and intact PTH
(iPTH) concentrations in serum were evaluated. A 25(OH)D concentration
of ≥30 ng/mL, 20-30 ng/mL, and <20 ng/mL were considered sufficiency,
insufficiency, and deficiency, respectively. Prevalent vertebral fractures
were determined using plain radiographs of the thoracic or lumbar spine.
The number of vertebral fractures of semiquantitative grade (SQ grade) 2,3
were counted. The relationships between 25(OH)D concentration and the
number of vertebral fractures, iPTH were examined using Spearman's rank
correlation coefficient.
Results: The mean 25(OH)D concentration was 11.3 ng/mL (4-26.1 ng/
mL). None of the subjects had adequate vitamin D levels. The mean iPTH
value in subjects was 48.9 pg/mL (9-429 pg/mL). The mean number of
prevalent vertebral fractures was 1.5 (0-11). There was a weak significant
correlation between 25(OH)D concentration and number of prevalent
vertebral fractures of SQ grade 2,3 (p=0.003, r=-0.168). There was a
weak significant correlation between 25(OH)D and iPTH concentrations
(p<0.001, r=-0.236).
Conclusion: Vitamin D deficiency was much severe in hip fracture
patients. Moderate or severe grade of prevalent vertebral fracture might
be related to vitamin D deficiency. Despite of vitamin D deficiency, iPTH
was within normal range in many subjects. This might be due to low
active daily living level prior to fracture.
P151
INFLAMMATORY MARKERS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
QUALITY OF LIFE, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY & GAIT SPEED
BUT NOT SARCOPENIA IN AGED MEN (40-79 Y)
J. Dupont1, L. Antonio2, L. Dedeyne1, T. W. O’Neill3, D.
Vanderschueren2, J. Tournoy1, K. Koppo4, E. Gielen1
1Geriatrics & Gerontology, Dept. of Public Health and Primary Care, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Clinical & Experimental Endocrinology,
Dept. of Chronic Diseases & Metabolism, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium, 3Arthritis Research UK Centre for Epidemiology & NIHR
Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Manchester,
UK, 4Exercise Physiology Research Group, Dept. of Movement
Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Objective: One of the presumed driving mechanisms behind sarcopenia
is the age-related chronic low-grade inflammation (inflammaging).
However, findings regarding inflammaging in sarcopenic older adults
are often conflicting. This study aimed to determine associations between
inflammatory markers, prevalent as well as incident sarcopenia,
sarcopenia-defining parameters, quality of life (QoL) and physical
activity in middle-aged and older European men.
Methods: Men aged 40-79 y (mean 59.66±11.00) were recruited from
population registers in eight European centres for participation in the
European Male Aging study (EMAS). Subjects were assessed at baseline
(2003-2005) and again after a median follow-up of 4.29 y. In 2577
participants, associations between baseline inflammatory markers (hs-
CRP, white blood cell count (WBC), albumin) and baseline physical
activity PASE) and QoL (SF-36) were analysed. In the Leuven and
Manchester cohort (n=447), data were available on muscle mass (whole
body DXA) and strength at baseline. In this subgroup, cross-sectional
associations between baseline inflammatory markers and sarcopenia-
defining parameters (hand grip strength, chair stand test, appendicular
lean mass, gait speed) and prevalent sarcopenia were examined. In a
further subgroup (n=277), associations with knee extensor strength were
explored. Predictive value of baseline inflammation on functional
decline, physical activity, QoL and incident sarcopenia was also
examined. Linear and logistic regression were used, adjusted for age,
BMI, centre and smoking.
Results: At baseline, hs-CRP and WBC were negatively associated with
PASE score (hs-CRP: β=-7.920, p<0.001; WBC: β=-4.552, p<0.001)
and the physical component score of SF-36 (hs-CRP: β=-1.025,
p<0.001; WBC: β=-0.364, p<0.001). Baseline WBC levels were
negatively associated with gait speed (β=-0.013, p=0.025), quadriceps
isometric 90° (β=-5.983; p=0.035) and isokinetic 60°/s peak torque/
body weight (β=-5.532, p=0.027). Prevalence of sarcopenia at baseline
was 18.1% (n=81). Of those without sarcopenia at baseline, 64 (18.6%)
satisfied criteria for sarcopenia at follow-up. There were no significant
associations between baseline inflammatory markers and either prevalent
or incident sarcopenia, or change in sarcopenia-defining parameters.
Conclusion: In middle aged and older men, inflammatory markers (hs-
CRP and WBC) were associated with measures of QoL, physical activity
and gait speed, but not with other sarcopenia-defining parameters. None
of the inflammatory markers in this study could predict functional
decline, decline in physical activity, decline in QoL or incident
sarcopenia.
P152
PROGNOSTIC MARKERS OF SURGICAL SITE INFECTION
FOR PATIENTS BEFORE TOTAL HIP ARTHROPLASTY
A. Tkachenko1, B. Gaykovaya1, I. Urazovskaya1, Y. Dorofeev2
1North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov, 2Scandinavia
Ava-Peter Clinic Attentive Medicine, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
Objective: Surgical site infection (SSI) is one of the most serious
complications after arthroplasty. The aim of this study was to develop
blood laboratory markers for early postoperative complications
prognosis.
Methods: This prospective study comprised 42 patients who underwent
primary total hip arthroplasty (THA) and 28 donors were in control
group. Mean age in group with THA was 59.8±21 y (range 34-76),
50% were female, in control group 54.3±22 y (range 31-72 y), 50% were
female. Blood samples were collected before THA. Patients after THA
were divided into 2 groups depending on postoperative complications:
31patients without SSI (group 1) and 11 patients with SSI (group 2).
Blood samples were analyzed, using an automatic blood cell counter
(DxH800; Beckman Coulter, USA) and flow cytometry (FC 500;
Beckman Coulter) by using Cytodiff reagent and analysis software
(Beckman Coulter).
Results: Patients in the group 2 had significantly lower baseline level of
B lymphocytes compared with patients without infectious complications
(group 1).
Table 1. Subpopulation composition of leukocytes in the blood of patients
before surgery, depending on the development of infectious
complications
Subpopulations of leukocytes
Ме (С25-С75), ×109/L
Group 1
(n=31)
Group 2
(n=11)
Total white blood cell count
6.4
[5.4 - 7.6]
6.7
[4.8 - 7.7]
B lymphocytes (СD3-CD19+)
0.22
[0.16 - 0.31]
0.16*
[0.10 - 0.22]
CD16 negative T lymphocytes
& NK cells
1.51
[1.20 - 1.82]
1.60
[1.38 - 2.05]
CD16 positive T lymphocytes
& NK cells
0.27
[0.21 - 0.35]
0.24
[0.14 - 0.44]
Total T lymphocyte
& NK cell count
1.85
[1.51 - 2.27]
1.73
[1.53 - 2.48]
Total lymphocyte count
2.07
[1.75 - 2.48]
1.96
[1.62 - 2.65]
CD16- negative monocytes
0.47
[0.33 - 0.60]
0.49
[0.41 - 0.59]
0.04
0.03
S136
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
CD16- positive monocytes
(pro-inflammatory)
[0.02 - 0.05]
[0.01 - 0.06]
Total monocytes count
0.52
[0.36 - 0.66]
0.52
[0.43 - 0.67]
CD16 negative immature
granulocytes (neutrophils)
0.01
[0.00 - 0.03]
0.02
[0.00 - 0.03]
Total eosinophil count
0.17
[0.10 - 0.28]
0.13
[0.08 - 0.24]
CD16 positive mature
granulocytes (neutrophils)
3.51
[2.36 - 4.30]
3.45
[2.58 - 4.34]
Total granulocyte
(neutrophil) count
3.52
[2.47 - 4.31]
3.47
[2.61 - 4.40]
Total basophil count
0.06
[0.04 - 0.09]
0.06
[0.06 - 0.08]
Note: * - significant differences, p<0.05
In the group of patients without infectious complications was significant
direct relationship (rs=0.45; р=0.02) between the number of B
lymphocytes and standard deviation of monocyte volume (SD-V-Mo).
This result indicates, that a large number of functionally active monocytes
perform the processes of phagocytosis and antigen presentation. In the
group of patients with the development of infectious complications was
an inverse relationship. (rs=- 0.68; р=0.02). We have detect that the SD-
V-Mo index in patients of the 2nd group was significantly (p<0.05) lower
(19.08) compared with the 1st group (19.71).
Conclusion: The blood level of B lymphocytes (СD3-CD19+) and the
SD-V-Mo can be prognostic markers of an SSI for patients before THA.
P153
COMPARING PRIMITIVE (I) AND SECONDARY (II) MALE
OSTEOPOROSIS (MOP)
N. Bouhedja1, L. Poulain1, X. Grapton2, P. Lemesle3
1Private Practice, La Garenne Colombes, 2Hopital Swiss, Issy Les
Moulineaux, 3Private Practice, Bois Colombes, France
Objective: Clinical, BMD and biological criteria in MOP I/II
Methods: 95 men, 50% MOP I/II, average 64 yo. Size, weight, BMD and
biology measurements.
Results: 9/10 of MOP II with single etiology: 33% iatrogenic (1/2
corticoids) 26% endocrine, 9% hypogonadism, 30% other. Discovery:
vertebrae compression (VC) I>II (57/45%),
medical history: VC 71/59%, other fractures 20% I=II, BMD 10%, size
loss, rare back pain. Risk factors: alcohol, tobacco, coffee, MOP I=II.
Sedentary lifestyle predominates in MOP II (43/31). 100% MOP I had
BMD/80% MOP II. Results before/after treatment (average time 6 y):
MOP I in vertebral -2.8/-2.1(significant), at femoral neck -2/-1.7, MOP
II vertebral -2.6/-1.9 (significant), at femoral neck -2.1/-1.8. FRAX: I
5.9%/ II 7.9%. Size loss differs significantly - 5.6 cm (I), -3 cm (II).
Weight: MOP I=MOP II. Biologically: vitamin D is subnormal (I=II),
average serum CTX is 0.48. Daily calcium intake is around 500 mg.
Treatment: MOP I and II: Ca and vitamin D (88/76%), oral
bisphosphonates (68%), teriparatide (25%), denosumab 0% (not
prescribed in MOP in France). Secondary etiologies are treated for
41%, surgically: 20%. The risk of falls: 27/39%(I/II), 50% >70 yo. Fall
causes: neurological and locomotor (20% each), unipodal balance is good
2/3. Rheumatologist (Rh) has hygiene-dietary approach, sensitive to the
risks of falls but does not prevent them enough, in this case he
recommends the cane (1/2). He is attentive to the management,
compliance, visual correction. He must improve the monitoring:
appointments and biological controls are prescribed only once /2, BMD
once /3. However, MOP II is better followed up even though the Rh does
not refer much to the endocrinologist (37%). Tolerance to treatments is
excellent (96%) with rare side effects (7%) for MOP I and II. The clinical
and biological results of treatment are very good in the framework of the
guidelines.
Conclusion: This study of the MOP, rich in information about Rh
practices, highlights several differences between MOP I and II but 2
significant items: loss of size, lumbar density before/after treatment.
P154
FRAGILITY OF RESULTS IN OSTEOPOROSIS RANDOMIZED
CONTROLLED TRIALS SUPPORTING THE TREATMENT
GUIDELINES
X. Huang1, J. D. A. Adachi2, G. Li1
1Center for Clinical Epidemiology & Methodology (CCEM), Guangdong
Second Provincial General Hospital, Guangzhou, China, 2Dept. of
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
Objective: Evidence-based guideline recommendations that are mainly
based on results of clinical trials are important to clinical decision-
making. The ‘fragility index’ (FI) has been proposed as a novel measure
of the robustness of trial findings. The purpose of our study was to
analyze the fragility of the randomized controlled trial (RCT) referenced
in the guidelines for the treatment of osteoporosis.
Methods: We included the clinical trials if they investigated primary
osteoporosis, used a parallel two-group design with a 1:1 randomization,
and reported fracture outcome as the primary endpoint. The FI for each
outcome was calculated. The FI was defined as the minimum number of
events in the experimental group that need to change from a nonevent to
an event in order to render a significant result non-significant (or vice
versa), which was calculated in a two-by-two contingency table based on
the data that the trial authors used in original analyses.
Results: Of the 372 RCTs identified from the guidelines, 42 were eligible
for analyses. The median FI was 10 (25th-75th percentile [Q1-Q3]: 4-18).
Of the 23 neutral trials, the median FI was 6 (Q1-Q3: 4-16), while the
remaining significant trials had a median FI of 11 (Q1-Q3: 4-40). There
were 17 (40.5%) trials where the number of patients lost to follow-up was
greater than the FI. The FI was significantly associated with sample size
(r=0.459, p=0.002), journal impact factor (r=0.426, p=0.0056), and the
percent of patients lost to follow-up (r=0.433, p=0.015).
Conclusion: We found that the robustness of results from include trials
varied, and results from some RCTs depend on a small number of events.
The FI may provide additional, intuitive metrics to help interpret the
robustness of trial results.
P155
RELATIVE EFFICACY AND SAFETY OF BIOLOGIC
TREATMENTS FOR OSTEOARTHRITIS: A CONVENTIONAL
AND NETWORK META-ANALYSIS
Yang Li1, Yiying Mai1, Peihua Cao1, Xin Wen1, Tianxiang Fan1,
Xiaoshuai Wang1, Guangfeng Ruan1, Su'An Tang1, Weiya Zhang2,
Changhai Ding1, Zhaohua Zhu1
1Clinical Research Centre, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China, 2Faculty of Medicine & Health Science,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Objective: To examine the efficacy and safety of novel biologic
interventions, including TNFα inhibitors, IL-1/IL-6/IL-17 inhibitors and
others, for the treatment of osteoarthritis (OA).
Methods: Five databases were searched up to Feb 20, 2021. Randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) and prospective studies comparing biologics with
placebo or each other in patients with OA were included. The primary
outcomes were the mean changes from baseline in pain and physical
function score. Secondary outcomes were adverse events (AEs) and mean
S137
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
change in stiffness score. Bayesian network and conventional meta-
analyses were performed.
Results: 15 studies were analyzed, including 13 RCTs and 2 pilot studies.
In the network meta-analysis, infliximab achieved a greater pain relief
compared with hyaluronic acid (HA) [standardized mean
differences(SMD) -22.95; -34.21 to -10.43], adalimumab (SMD -21.71;
-32.65 to -11.00), anakinra (SMD -24.63; -38.79 to -10.05), canakinumab
(SMD -32.83; -44.45 to -20.68), etanercept (SMD -18.40; -29.97 to -
5.73), lutikizumab (SMD -25.11; -36.47 to -14.78), naproxen (SMD -
30.16; -41.78 to -17.38), tocilizumab (SMD -24.02; -35.63 to -11.86)
and placebo (SMD -25.88; -34.87 to -16.60). Probability ranking
indicated that infliximab had the highest (98%) probability to be the best
drug for pain reduction, while canakinumab (79%) was the worst one. In
the conventional meta-analysis compared to placebo, tocilizumab was
superior in pain (SMD -0.60; -1.05 to -0.15) and function (SMD -1.48;
-2.00 to -0.97), while infliximab (SMD -2.04; -2.56 to -1.52) and
etanercept (SMD -0.47; -0.89 to -0.05) were more effective only in pain
outcome. No more significant differences were observed between
biologics and placebo.
Conclusion: Infliximab was the most effective biologic for pain relief in
patients with OA and did not cause more AEs compared with placebo.
The efficacy and safety of other novel biologics was uncertain and more
RCTs are warranted.
P156
RETROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECTS OF
NONCOMPLIANCE WITH DENOSUMAB ON CHANGES IN
BONE MINERAL DENSITY DURING THE COVID-19
PANDEMIC
C.-F. Huang1, M.-S. Shiao2, T.-Y. Mao3
1National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University Hospital, Yilan City,
2Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, 3Chaoyang University of
Technology, Taichung, Taiwan
Objective: Although denosumab is a safe and effective treatment for
osteoporosis in various clinical trials, few studies have investigated its
efficacy in specific clinical situations. The effect of noncompliance with
the standard six-month dosing regimen for denosumab on BMD was
assessed in a retrospective study of patients prescribed denosumab during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods: Between February 2019 and September 2020, 638 patient
records were reviewed, with 236 patients meeting the eligibility criteria.
Patients were divided into three groups: those who received denosumab
injections between 5-7 months after their initial subcutaneous injection,
those who received denosumab injections between 7-9 months after their
initial subcutaneous injection, and those who received denosumab
injections >9 months after their initial subcutaneous injection. A
multivariate regression study was conducted to compare the BMD shift
(at least one year apart) before and after two denosumab injections
between the three prespecified groups in both the lumbar spine (LS)
and the femoral neck (FN).
Results: The difference between LS BMD indicates that there is a
statistical difference between subjects who received denosumab
injections between 5-7 months (near-standard dosing interval) and >9
months (p<0,05), but not in FN BMD, and no clinically significant
association was identified.
Conclusion: The results of this study show that in special clinical
situations, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, clinicians may have some
flexibility to prescribe denosumab, but the interval between injections
should not exceed 9 months.
P157
A LOOK AT LOW T3 SYNDROME IN RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS
O. V. Paramonova1, L. N. Shilova1, E. G. Korenskaya1
1Volgograd State Medical University, Volgograd, Russia
Syndrome of low T3 level (low T3), arises as a general response of the
body as a compensatory reaction in severe disease, and reflects adaptive
metabolic reactions and energy savings in a painful situation.
Euthyroidism with a low level of T3 indicates an energy deficiency in
the tissues. Apparently, under conditions of euthyroidism with a low level
of T3, oxygen assimilation by tissues almost does not occur, energy is
wasted, and therefore, the body in this situation is in a state of constant
energy hunger. The analysis of biochemical tests shows that under these
conditions there are colossal losses of structural material - proteins, to a
much lesser extent - carbohydrates and fats, but the assimilation of
oxygen by "starving" tissues and organs does not occur. At the same time,
the result of prolonged hypoxia and energy deficiency is increased body
weight loss, amyotrophic syndrome, the development of amyloidosis,
myocardial dystrophy, fibrosing alveolitis, vasculitis, etc.
The mechanisms of development of the established changes in the
function of the thyroid gland are not clear. Despite a decrease in T3 and
an increase in T4, the clinical picture of diseases in the examined persons
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) did not always correspond to the classical
picture of hypo- or hyperthyroidism, although there were complaints
characteristic of these states.
It is possible that in RA there is a secondary thyroid disorder associated
with the function of the pituitary gland and hypothalamus.
In addition, the shift in the ratio of free T3 and free T4 levels in RA may be
associated with the development of changes in the metabolism of thyroid
hormones in peripheral tissues, a decrease in the sensitivity of receptors to
them in cells and target tissues, as well as a decrease in the activity of T4
deiodases.
Possibly, at the first stage of RA development, an increase in the level of
T3 in the blood occurs due to the adaptive-compensatory response of the
whole organism and the thyroid gland to the increased need for
thyroglobulin to support metabolic processes in tissues under conditions
of illness. This is provided by an increase in the conversion of T4 to T3, as
well as an increase in the synthesis of T3 in the thyroid gland. In
unfavorable conditions, more triiodothyronine is required to maintain
constancy in the intracellular and pericellular environment, which directly
controls energy metabolism in tissues. Prolonged increased consumption
of T3 leads to its functional insufficiency and indirectly contributes to the
formation of combined pathology of RA and ATP. As a result, patients
with RA and ATP often have "ineffective" goiter transformation,
accompanied by a hypothyroid state relative to triiodothyronine, and a
hyperthyroid state relative to thyroxine against the background of normal
TSH synthesis.
Excessive concentration of thyroid hormones contributes to an increase in
inflammatory reactions. It has been proven that the more vividly the
infection manifests, leading to the development of RA, the more often
the thyroid function increases. Infection, even in an inactive state,
S138
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
enhances thyroid activity in 50% of patients. It is assumed that the
infection causes irritation of the thyroid parenchyma, pituitary gland,
hypothalamic region. On the other hand, a violation of the normal activity
of the thyroid gland affects the course of the infectious process. This is
manifested in various metabolic disorders, changes in calorigenesis and
oxygen consumption by tissues, the activity of the central nervous system
and other organs, as well as in the inhibition of lymphocytopoiesis, a
decrease in the reactivity of the body and an increase in the adverse effect
of infection on the course of the rheumatoid process.
With the involvement of the thyroid gland during RA, the pathological
process intensifies, its course worsens, and the tactics of treating these
patients also change. An excess of thyroid hormones leads to a disruption
in the formation of a general adaptation syndrome, patients become torpid
to any therapy. The condition improves with a gradual decrease in the
functional activity of the thyroid gland against the background of the
appointment of treatment. On the other hand, this can be explained by the
fact that, in addition to autoimmune mechanisms in thyroid damage, an
important role is played by the direct influence of "pro-inflammatory"
cytokines: interleukin-1, 6, tumor necrosis factor, which can enhance
immune responses, interact with thyrotropin receptors and additionally
stimulate the production of thyroid hormones. The thyroid gland expresses
interleukins when exposed to circulating immune complexes (which are
formed in excess in RA), and cytokines, in turn, stimulate fibroblast
proliferation, excessive production of collagen and glycosaminoglycans,
leading to a narrowing of the joint space, the formation of bone outgrowths
and a decrease in functional activity joint. It is known that the production of
cytokines, in particular IL-6, is increased in RA. An increase in the level of
cytokines such as α-interferon, γ-interferon, IL-1, IL-2, TNF and
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor may be accompanied by the
development of hypothyroidism or thyrotoxicosis. These changes are often
of a transient nature and disappear several months after the normalization of
their number. The process of formation of reversive T3 is considered as a
way of removing an excess amount of thyroxine from metabolism. The
reversiveT3 content rises sharply in conditions when it is necessary to
conserve energy, to protect the body from overheating during fasting, an
increase in body temperature, systemic or severe diseases, as well as in old
and senile age.
P158
PANDEMIC, LOCKDOWN AND RHEUMATOLOGIC
PRACTICE
X. Grapton1, L. Poulain2, P. Lemesle3, N. Bouhedja2
1Hopital Swiss, Issy Les Moulineaux, 2Private Practice, La Garenne
Colombes, 3Private Practice, Bois Colombes, France
Objective: During this exceptional and particular period of confinement,
we have observed and analyzed the rheumatologists’ (Rh) feelings,
reactions, and attitudes that may have emerged.
Methods: During the first lockdown in France, during spring 2020, 13
questions, 9 appendices, ranking of the most frequently cited reactions
were asked to 38 private practice Rh from the Ile-de-France region,
average age 63 yo, 58% male (M).
Results: Fear of being contaminated and of transmitting M 91/F 69%,
concern about an unknown pandemic M 86/F 69%, anger M 71/F 84%
were the main feelings expressed. Anger at the indifference to the
exposure of doctors in the city 84%, the unpreparedness of the authorities
M 95/F 62%, the mortality in EHPAD (nursing homes) 81%, the media
cacophony 79%, the hidden reality 71%. On a personal level, according
to 61%, the Rh is not anxious about the world after, has no psychological
repercussions (sleep, melancholy, family relations, frustration) 58% and
his degree of commitment was guilt-free 55%. Professionally: perplexity
in the face of the contradictions of experts and scientific journals 79%,
wide acceptance of constraints in the practice (10 h/d mask wearing, 92%,
spaced reception of patients 95%, education of barrier gestures and social
distancing 97%), adaptation of the medical practice (teleconsultation,
telephone consultation) 78%, fear of abandoning treatment or diagnostic
delay M 82/F 62%, financial arrangements necessary M 86/F 53%. For
M: worries about the pandemic, anger and uncertainty about what will
happen next predominate in this order. For F, anger (untruths and lack of
means) is the main feeling. Anger, fear and uncertainty are the most
frequently cited feelings for both male and female.
Conclusion: The Rh at the end of the period of confinement during
spring of 2020, is worried M>F and anger especially in front of the
sanitary unpreparedness M>F. On a personal level the private life has
been little affected F>M and he has been able to adapt professionally.
Nevertheless, the deconfinement has not been a banal return to normal
63% M=F.
P159
BENEFITS OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN CHRONIC
RHEUMATOID DISEASE (CRD)
P. Lemesle1, L. Poulain2, X. Grapton3, N. Bouhedja1
1Private Practice Creer Group, Bois Colombes, 2Private Practice Creer
Group, La Garenne Colombes, 3Hopital Swiss Creer Group, Issy Les
Moulineaux, France
Objective: CREER group of rheumatologists (Rh) has studied a CRD
population practicing a physical activity (motivations, expectations,
nature and rhythm) excluding household ones despite their quantifiable
energy value (MET). This study aimed to determine the place of physical
activity in the management of CRD.
Methods: 207 patients, 53 yo average, 56% (50-70 yo), 60% women
(W), rheumatoid arthritis (RA): 57%) or ankylosing spondylitis (AS):
40%, low or moderate activity (66%). Years of evolution: 10 RA/11.5
AS, corticosteroids 34/5%, NSAIDs 15/52%, conventional DMARDS
84/30%, biotherapies 21/43%. Comorbidities: 55 RA/ 44% AS, high
blood pressure 20%, overweight 21%, tobacco 13.5%, other 19%.
Results: 7/10 patients are encouraged to engage in physical activity,
regardless of gender, age, RA or AS. Are suggested: walking 53%,
swimming/aquagym 40%, gym 19%. The practice is regular for 60%
W>M, RA=AS, more for 70% if <40 yo and >60 yo. Really practiced
activity: walking 46%, aquatic activities 37%, cycling 29%, home sports
19%. Once/week minimum is followed for cycling and swimming,
insufficiently for walking, largely for sport at home. 50% have been
practicing for 3 y. 60% adapt the rhythm to the CRD activity.
Motivations: maintain one's health, destress. Sport recommendations:
Rh 80%/ general physician 45%. 50% patients ignore if this will improve
or worsen the CRD. Hence the need for information by the Rh of the
benefits of physical activity. If 60% of patients modify their activity
because of CRD, many do not participate in sport because no time, no
need, no desire RA=AS.
Conclusion: The main activity practiced and advocated is walking. The
patients go beyond, by mobilizing for cycling, swimming and gym. But
the reluctance persists and we must, through therapeutic education,
convince of the benefits of the activity on CRD and its comorbidities,
unknown to 50% of patients. To map lesions, judge the ability and desires
are necessary to set goals for duration and frequency of activity. Using
connected tools improves compliance. Finally, walking which does not
require neither schedule nor equipment (otherwise a cane) should become
a firstline prescription.
P160
ANALYSIS OF TREATMENT RESULTS FOR LATERAL
CLAVICLE FRACTURES AND FRACTURE DISLOCATIONS
M. Kodirov1, O. Shodiyev1, U. Mirobidov1
1Samarkand Branch of Republican Specialised Scientific Practical
Medical Center of Traumatology & Orthopedics, Samarkand, Uzbekistan
S139
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Description of a new method of surgical treatment of fracture
dislocations and fractures of the acromial end of the clavicle using a
clavicle hook plate in the department of concomitant injuries of adults
of the Samarkand branch of RSSPMCTO in period from 2015-2020.
Methods: When analyzing 150 cases of medical histories for a clavicle
fracture, 45 fracture dislocations and fractures of the acromial end of the
clavicle were identified; there were 42 injured men, 3 women. According
to the types of injury, the largest number falls on household - 12%, road
traffic accidents - 11%, sports - 3%, street - 2%, others - 3%. Under
general anesthesia, the acromion and the fracture site of the acromial
end of the clavicle are exposed in layers for 5-6 cm. The hook is placed
under the acromion, the plate is reinforced with three or four screws on
the acromial end of the clavicle. The wound is sutured in layers.
Immobilization with a "scarf bandage" until removing the stitches for 7-
10 d. Development of the hand, wrist joint from the first days in the elbow
joint from 3-5 d.
Results: According to the described method, 45 operations were
performed. Development of the hand, wrist joint from the first days; in
the elbow joint from 3-5 d. Movement in the shoulder joint after 2 weeks
from the day of surgery. According to the described method, 45
operations were performed. Early functional development of the joints,
shortening the treatment time in the postoperative period, and shortening
the time of inpatient and outpatient treatment made it possible to reduce
the period of temporary disability.
Conclusion: The proposed method of surgery with the use of a clavicular
hook plate is currently the most optimal in comparison with other
methods of surgery. The technique of performing operation is not
complicated, it is carried out with minimal traumatization of soft tissues
and does not require special external immobilization of the limb.
P161
MALE SECONDARY OSTEOPOROSIS: MULTILEVEL
ASPECTS
I. A. Voinea1, A. Ghemigian2, E. Petrova2, E. D. Becheru1, A.
Dumitrascu1, G. Voicu1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Multiple causes of male osteoporosis are described like
glucocorticoid exposure, hypogonadism, uncontrolled long term
hyperthyroidism, primary hyperparathyroidism, severe hypovitaminosis
D, different active endocrine tumours of pituitary and adrenal glands, etc.
(1-5). After the administration of glucocorticoids, rapid bone loss occurs,
and fracture risk increases within a few months in a dose-dependent
manner. We aim to introduce a male with prior ankylosing spondylitis
can be associated with bone loss and increased risk of fractures.
Case report: A 63-year old, nonsmoking male is admitted for evaluation
of osteoporosis. His medical history includes: HLA-B27-positive
ankylosing spondylitis (AS). He is also known with left thyroidectomy
and isthmectomy for toxic adenoma that was performed 38 y prior to
current admission, without consecutive levothyroxine treatment and an
additional right thyroid node, which was detected 14 y ago. At the age of
22 y, the patient was offered glucocorticoid treatment for 2 y. The medical
background also includes: aortic and mitral regurgitation, extrasystolic
supraventricular arrhythmia, grade III arterial hypertension, currently
controlled with specific oral medication. Furthermore, he is suffering
from kidney microlithiasis and vitamin D deficiency which was treated
with vitamin D supplements. On admission, he accused persistent back
pain without evidence of a radiological thoracic-lumbar fracture. The
panel of evaluation revealed: total calcium=9.83 mg/dL (8.4-10.3),
phosphorus=2.33 mg/dL (2.5-4.5), alkaline phosphatase=100 U/L(38-
129), CrossLaps=0.130 ng/mL (0.104-0.504), osteocalcin=17.82 ng/ml
(14-46), P1NP=21.07 ng/mL (normal: 15=58), PTH=55.87 pg/mL (15-
65), 25-hydroxyvitaminD=42.3 ng/ml (30-100), TSH=0.59 μUI/mL
(normal: 0.34-5.6), freeT4=0.87 ng/dL (normal: 0.61-1.12),
calcitonin=3.53 pg/mL(normal: 1-11.8), without hypogonadism. L2-4
lumbar BMD-DXA=0.667 g/cm2, T-score=-3 SD, Z-score=-1.7 SD. 1 y
after weekly alendronic acid 5600 UI and vitaminD3 supplements, DXA
showed BMD=0.681 g/cm2, T-score=-3 SD, Z-score=-1.7 SD.
Conclusion: Prior glucocorticoid exposure in addition to AS are
contributor to male bone loss. However, stationary BMD after oral
bisphosphonates is suggestive for a good response to therapy.
References:
1.
Radu L, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2754.
2.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;14:564.
3.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
4.
Poiana C, et al. 2009;104:753.
5.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
P162
MIR-671 ABUNDANT IN SMALL EXTRACELLULAR
VESICLES DERIVED FROM RHIZOMA DRYNARIAE-
PRECONDITIONED BONE MESENCHYMAL STEM CELLS
REGULATING OSTEOGENESIS BY TARGETING TAK1
MEDIATING WNT SIGNALING
X. Li1, L. Yang2, X. Zhu1, R. Zhang2
1College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan University, 2College of
Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China
The antiosteoporosis and bone protection effects of Rhizoma drynariae
(RD) are well known. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from
mesenchymal stem cells have been demonstrated to possess potent
regeneration. Whether the antiosteoporosis and bone protection effects
of RD are correlated to the exosomes secretion and delivery is still not
fully understood. In this study, we evaluated the osteogenesis effects of
sEVs derived from RD-preconditioned bone mesenchymal stem cells
(RD-sEV) on osteoblasts. The underlying mechanism of RD-sEV-
induced osteogenesis was explored by RNA sequencing and verified by
transfection with the corresponding mimic and inhibitor. RD-sEV
stimulates proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of osteoblasts.
Sequencing identified a unique enrichment of a set of miRNAs in RD-
sEV. Overexpression or inhibition in vitro demonstrated that the
osteogenesis-inducing potential was primarily attributed to miR-671,
one of the most dramatically downregulated miRNAs in the RD-sEV
fraction. Dual-luciferase reporter assays showed that miR-671 attenuated
osteogenesis through direct suppression of TAK1 by targeting its 3’
untranslated region. Rescue experiments indicated that miR-671 mimic
could reverse the decrease of beta-catenin which aroused by Dkk-1, a
classic Wnt signaling inhibitor. These data report the potential of RD-
sEV to stimulate osteogenic differentiation achieved by delivering sEV-
miR-671 to target TAK1 for further regulating the Wnt signaling.
P163
MONITORING OF LUMBAR SPINE KINEMATICS AFTER
MICRODISCECTOMY WITH THE USE OF WEARABLE
SE NSORS: A P AT H T O R ECOGNIZ E P OSSI BLE
RECURRENCE KINEMATIC FACTORS
G. Papagiannis1, A. Triantafyllou1, P. Papagelopoulos1, E.
Papadopoulos2, P. Koulouvaris1
1National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 1st Dept. of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical School, Attikon General University
Hospital, 2National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 2nd Dept.
of Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical School, Agia Olga General Hospital,
Athens, Greece
S140
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: The literature reports 5-15% recurrence rate of lumbar spine
microdiscectomies (LSMs). Lumbar spine flexion (LSF) is mentioned as
the most harmful load to the intervertebral disc that could lead to
recurrence during the 6 postoperative weeks. Patients with sagittal plane
ROMs more than 10° during that period had a recurrence rate of 26.5%,
whereas those with <10° had a rate of 4.1%. The purpose of this study is
to quantify LSFs, following LSM, by quantifying (monitoring during
daily activities) the frequency of more than 10° LSF ROM, at the period
of 6 weeks postoperatively.
Methods: ROMs were recorded during 33 subjects’ daily activities for
24 h twice per week. MetaMotionR+, Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU),
was used for the measurement of lumbar spine kinematics.
Results: The mean number of >10° of LSFs per hour were: 40.1/h during
the 1st postoperative week (P.W.) (29% normal subjects-N.S.), 2nd P.W.
61.2/h (44% N.S.), 3rd P.W. 72.9/h (52.7% N.S.), 4th P.W. 61.1/h
(61.1% N.S.), 5th P.W. (69.7% N.S.) and 6th P.W. 106.25 (76.9% N.S.).
Conclusion: LSFs constitute important risk factors for rLDH. This is
the first time, to our knowledge, recording lumbar spine kinematics
during daily activities for 24 h/d following microdiscectomy.
Although patients’ data report less sagittal plane movements than
normal, further in vitro studies should be done by using our results of
the patients' kinematic, to identify if such a kinematic pattern could
cause reherniation of microdiscectomied lumbar discs. Furthermore
IMUs could be additionally used as a precaution measure, to alert
patients by vibration, whenever they exceed acceptable rates of LSFs.
P164
EQUITY OF HEALTHCARE EXPENDITURE IN HIP
FRACTURE PATIENTS ACROSS SOCIOECONOMIC
GROUPS: A BENEFIT INCIDENCE ANALYSIS USING
AUSICUROS DATA
A. Lal1, S. Overell1, K. Sanders2, J. Talevski2, J. A. Kanis3, F.
Borgstrom4, A. Svedbom5, S. Brennan-Olsen6
1Deakin University, School of Health & Social Development, Burwood,
Australia, 2University of Melbourne, Dept. of Medicine, Melbourne,
Australia, 3University of Sheffield, Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases,
Sheffield, UK, 4Karolinska Institute, Dept. of Learning, Informatics,
Management and Ethics, Medical Management Centre, Stockholm,
Sweden, 5ICON Plc, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Deakin University, School
of Health and Social Development, Geelong, Australia
Objective: Data suggest a higher incidence of hip fracture among those
of lower socioeconomic position (SEP) compared to those of higher SEP.
With a universal healthcare system in Australia, we examined health
service expenditure for hip fracture patients across income and education
groups using healthcare utilisation data collected by the Australian arm of
the International Costs and Utilities Related to Osteoporotic fractures
Study (AusICUROS) study.
Methods: Healthcare utilisation data 4 months post-fracture were
extracted for participants aged ≥50 y with hip fracture (n=174, 76%
women). Selfreported income and highest level of education were
categorised as low, medium, or high. Using Benefits Incidence
Analysis, total healthcare expenditure (public and private) was calculated
from 2020 Medicare Benefits Schedule, and mean hip fracture related
admissions were ascertained from the 2018 National Hospital Cost Data
Collection. Concentration Indexes (CI) were developed to indicate the
degree of socioeconomic inequality in healthcare expenditure. Their
magnitude indicates the strength of the relationship and degree of
variability. We also compared distributions of expenditure across SEP
groups with expected need inferred from hip fracture incidence.
Results: The CI suggested health expenditure across socioeconomic
groups was equitable, although we observed a nonsignificant trend
toward greater healthcare expenditure in the lowest income and education
groups (CI=-0.0455, p=0.20, and -0.0506, p=0.09, respectively).
Conclusion: Overall healthcare expenditure for individuals with incident
hip fracture was found to be equitable across socioeconomic groups,
slightly favouring the most disadvantaged groups. The results appear as
a positive reflection of Australia’s universal health system.
P165
DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNAL VALIDATION OF
MACHINE LEARNING APPROACH FOR PREDICTING 1-
YEAR MORTALITY AFTER FRAGILITY HIP FRACTURE
N. Kitcharanant1, P. Chotiyarnwong2
1Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 2Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand
Objective: This study aimed to (1) develop and internally validate the
mortality prediction models for 1-y mortality after hip fracture using the
machine learning approach; and (2) incorporate the algorithm with the
best prediction performance into a freely accessible mobile application.
Methods: This retrospective study was conducted using database from
our fracture liaison service registry. 492 patients diagnosed with fragility
hip fracture were included. The database was randomly split into two sets:
344 cases (70%) for training and 148 (30%) for testing. A machine
learning technique was utilized to develop the Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) and logistic regression (LR) models, and internally
validated by evaluating their accuracies and the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curves (AUC). A mobile application to predict 1-
y mortality after hip fracture was then developed using the best
performing algorithm (Figure 1).
S141
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: The ANN model was the best performing algorithm with the
highest accuracy of 96.80% and 95.95% in the training and testing
datasets, respectively. The AUC of the ANN model for both datasets were
0.993 [95%CI: 0.986, 0.998] and 0.949 [95%CI: 0.892, 0.993], higher
than the 0.986 [95%CI: 0.976, 0.994] and 0.939 [95%CI: 0.881, 0.985] of
the logistic regression model. The best algorithm was subsequently
incorporated into a mobile application: (Figure 2)
Conclusion: Our machine learning approach provided excellent
capability for predicting 1-y mortality after hip fracture and had
developed into a mobile application for any users. External validation
of this tool is needed to ensure the clinical utility in hip fracture care
among different centers.
P166
THE RESULTS OF MEDICATION CORRECTION OF
CLINICAL AND ORTHOPEDIC MANIFESTATIONS IN
PATIENTS WITH VARIOUS FORMS OF FIBROUS DYSPLASIA
M. D. Guk1, M. D. Zyma1, M. D. Kincha-Polishchuk1, M. D. Cheverda1,
M. D. Skuratov1, M. D. Vyderko1
1SI "The Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics" by NAMS of
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: To improve medication correction of disorders of the
structural state and metabolism of bone tissue in patients with fibrous
dysplasia (FD).
Methods: There were 16 patients with FD who were receiving
medication treatment. Age of patients was from 6-28 y. All patients
underwent basic antiosteoporotic therapy, of which 10 were treated with
pamidronic acid. Serum Ca and Vit D3 levels were screened before and
during treatment. The structural state of bone tissue was studied according
to the Z- and T-criteria, bone metabolism - the study of bone markers:
total P1NP, β-CTx, osteocalcin.
Results: Based on paraclinical studies in patients with FD, depending on
the clinical manifestations, form of the disease, age, indications for
medication treatment with the use of pamidronic acid have been
developed. Basic treatment and basic treatment in combination with
pamidronic acid were used. Pamidronic acid medications were used at a
dose of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg/d for one – three infusions, the interval between
cycles was 3-4 months. Schemes, doses, combinations of pamidronic acid
with other antiosteoporotic drugs depending on changes in the condition
and metabolism of bone tissue in FD were determined. Indications for
basic therapy were: β-CTx up to 0.500 ng/ml and Z-test up to -1.0 SD.
Basic therapy included: preparations of Ca "Osteogenon" 1-2 capsules 2
times a day and vitamin D3 in a dose of up to 2000 IU. Indications for
basic therapy in combination with the use of pamidronic acid at a dose of
0.5-1.0 mg/kg/d were severe pain, a significant area of long bone lesions,
changes in β-CTx from 1.5 ng/ml and above, Z-test from - 1.5 SD and
below. The effectiveness of therapy was assessed by changes in the level
of β-CTx in the serum and the Z-test of the lumbar vertebrae. The
effectiveness of the used treatment did not depend on the dose of
pamidronic acid and the form of FD. The relation between changes in
the marker of osteoresorption and its reduction depending on the initial
values (Wilcoxon's test p=0.0045).
Conclusion: The results of medication treatment in patients with FD
indicate its significant effectiveness (Wilcoxon test p=0.0045): reduction
and elimination of pain, improvement of the structural condition and
metabolism of bone tissue.
P167
HYPOVITAMINOSIS D ON AN ADULT FEMALE: FROM
AUTOIMMUNE CONDITIONS TO PANDEMIC DAYS
I. A. Voinea1, E. Petrova2, A. Draghici1, A. Dumitrascu1, G. Voicu1, A.
Ghemigian2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I.Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: COVID-19 pandemic was associated with increased risk of
hypovitaminosis D due to lockdown regulations and limited outdoor
activities, while young adult patients with autoimmune conditions may
associated decreased values of 25-hydroxyvitamin D due to copresence
of celiac disease, glucocorticoid exposure, malabsorption, overtreatment
of autoimmune hypothyroidism, etc. (1-5). We aim to introduce a female
case known with autoimmune conditions who was admitted for vitamin D
deficiency related symptoms during pandemic.
Case report: A 41-year-old, nonsmoker female is admitted for nonspecific
muscle cramps, and joints pain, asthenia which is persistent for the last
several months in addition to chronic low back pain (which required
chronic use of nonsteroid anti-inflammatory medication). Her personal
medical background reveals a diagnosis of HLA-B27-positive ankylosing
spondylitis that was established seven years before current admission. She
is also known with autoimmune thyroiditis with negative antibodies, a
diagnostic that was based on suggestive ultrasound features with highly
hypoechoic pattern of relative small thyroid gland (and normal thyroid
function). She is also confirmed with thrombophilia. She has a negative
personal history of confirmed COVID-19 infection and she followed the
lockdown restrictions for several weeks. The family medical history is
irrelevant. On admission, clinical examination of the thyroid is within
normal limits on a menstruated normal weighted female. Biochemistry data
points out normal total calcium of 9.45 mg/dL (normal: 8.4-10.3 mg/dL).
Endocrine panel shows TSH=1.28 μUI/mL (normal: 0.5-4.5 μUI/mL), free
levothyroxine=11.65 pmol/L (normal: 9-19 pmol/L), anti-thyroperoxidase
antibodies=10.88 UI/mL (normal: 0-35), anti-thyroglobulin antibodies=10
UI/mL (normal: 0-115 UI/mL). 25-hydroxyvitamin D=10 ng/mL (normal
>30 ng/mL) with increased PTH levels and negative antibodies for celiac
disease. Supplementation with daily 2000 UI of vitamin D for 12 weeks
followed by daily 1000 UI was recommended.
Conclusion: The association thrombophilia-hypovitaminosis D has been
reported in some patients, but it is rather incidental. Chronic use of anti-
inflammatory medication may cause malabsorption, and also the
potential of a second autoimmune disease at intestinal level may cause
this deficiency, but the current pandemic reality has become a new cause
of it.
S142
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
References:
1.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
2.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
3.
Poiana C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:187.
4.
Radu L, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2754.
5.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2438.
P168
BONE INVOLVMENT ON A YOUNG MALE WITH
MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA
I. C. Raducu1, I. A. Voinea1, A. Draghici1, N. Dumitru2, E. Petrova2, A.
Dumitrascu1, G. Voicu1, A. Ghemigian2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I.Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), neuroendocrine tumor with
bone spreading potential, may be already metastasized at the time of
diagnosis (for instance, affecting liver, lung, brain and) (1-5). Most
common skeleton sites are the spine and pelvis, followed by the ribs, then
the extremities, and skull (1-5). Also, MTC may associate primary
hyperparathyroidism (MEN2A syndrome) and common vitamin D
deficiency (1-5). We aim to introduce a male with MTC and severe
outcome, in addition to bone involvement.
Case report: A 31-year-old, nonsmoking male is admitted as an
emergency for a large right mediastinal mass of 11.4/8.3/14.3 cm, causing
severe haemoptysis. Biopsy showed MTC, so he was referred for
endocrine assays. Paraclinical investigations: serum calcitonin=6245 pg/
mL (normal: 8.3-14.3 pg/mL), chromogranin A=189.5 ng/mL (normal:
20-125 ng/mL); neuron specific enolase=12.93 ng/mL (normal: 0-12 ng/
mL), total serum calcium=9.1 mg/dL (normal: 8.4-10.2 mg/dL),
P T H = 4 4 . 1 2
p g / m L ( n o r m a l : 1 5 - 6 5
p g / m L ) ,
2 5 -
hydroxyvitaminD=25.98 ng/mL (normal: 30-100 ng/mL), normal
metanephrines/normetanephrines. Cervical ultrasound: no specific
nodule at thyroid, but multiple supraclavicular and lateral cervical lymph
nodes (blocklike), of maximum 5.78/2.13 cm. Computed tomography
(CT) showed: thyroid nodule of 0.9/0.6 cm, lung metastases with
secondary incomplete atelectasis, hepatosplenomegaly, numerous
supraclavicular, intercostal and phrenic lymph nodes, in association with
mediastinal mass. A severe cholestasis initially contraindicated
chemotherapy thus external radiotherapy for the lung and mediastinal
masses was started followed by chemotherapy (doxorubicin-
cyclophosphamide-vincristine). 8 months calcitonin increased to 11791
pg/mL while total serum calcium decreased to 8.6 mg. Lumbar BMD-
DXA=1.342 g/cm2, Z-score=1.1 SD, CT revealed more metastases
(including at liver of 2.8/2.7 cm) and an osteolytic lesion on left iliac
bone of 6.2/4.5 cm, confirmed at. Tc99m bone scintigraphy as high uptake,
also at right humerus, scapula, 1/3 distal left femur. Zolendronic acid (4
mg/28 d) was added.
Conclusion: Bone metastases might be expected even in young patients
with uncontrolled MTC.
References:
1.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2438.
2.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
3.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
4.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
5.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
P169
POLYMORPHISM OF ANDROGEN RECEPTOR GENE AND
SKELETON FORMATION IN TRANSGENDER INDIVIDUALS
V. Makarova1, V. Solov'Eva2, A. Kremenitskaya2
1National Research Institute of Public Health N.А. Semashko, 2Scientific
Center of Personalized Medicine, Moscow, Russia
Objective: The androgen receptor (AR) gene MIGHR is known to be
associated with transsexualism. Bone tissue is one of the target organs for
androgens. Trochanteric index (TI) (ratio of height to the leg length) may
indicate the organism androgenization level during puberty. It is
interesting to identify the peculiarities of this process in the transperson
population. Our aim was to identify the connection between androgen
receptor (AR) gene CAG polymorphism and skeletal formation type in
transgender persons.
Methods: The study involved 262 patients above 18 y with the diagnosis
of transsexualism (121 MtF, 141 FtM). Mental and sexual status; TI; and
genetic analysis (AR gene polymorphism) was estimated.
Results: The average TI in the MtF group accounts for 1.93±0.03, which
represents hypoevolutive type of skeletal development. For FtM group TI
was 2.01±0.04, that matches frontier between normal evolutive and
hyperevolutionary types. Differences in TI values in the MtF and FtM
were significant (p=0.000). The MtF and FtM groups showed significant
differences in the number of СAG repeats (p=0.000). A strong negative
correlation was found between the TI value and number of CAG repeats
in both groups (R=-0.24; p=0.000).
Conclusion: TI is associated with polymorphism of AR. FtM population
is characterized by a less number of CAG repeats in the AR gene
compared to MtF, a higher TI, and a tendency toward a hyperevolutionary
type of the formation of the skeleton. The MtF population otherwise is
characterized by a hypoevolutive type of the formation of the skeleton.
P170
EFFECT OF VITAMIN D SUPPLEMENTATION ON RISK OF
BREAST CANCER: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND META-
ANALYSIS OF RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS
Z. Li1, G. Li1, L. Thabane2
1Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital, Guangzhou, China,
2McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
Objective: Vitamin D supplementations are widely used to prevent
osteoporosis, especially in menopausal women. However, the association
between vitamin D and the risk of breast cancer should be taken into
consideration. Laboratory findings indicated that vitamin D might have
potent protective effect on breast cancer, but epidemiology studies
reported conflicting results. The aim of the study was to conduct a
systematic review and meta-analysis to clarify the efficacy and safety of
vitamin D supplementation on risk of breast cancer.
Methods: MEDLINE, EMBASE, The Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials, ClinicalTrials.gov and abstracts of three major
conferences were searched (up to December 8, 2020). Parallel
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) examining the efficacy of vitamin
D supplementation on risk of breast cancer or change of mammography
compared with placebo in females were included. Data were meta-
analyzed using a random-effects model. Bayesian meta-analysis was
conducted to synthesize the results using data from observational studies
as priors.
Results: Seven RCTs were identified for effect of vitamin D on risk of
breast cancer, with 19,137 females included for meta-analysis. No
statistically significant effect of vitamin D on risk of breast cancer was
S143
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
found in classical random-effect meta-analysis (risk ratio=1.04, 95% CI:
0.84 to 1.28, p=0.71). When Bayesian meta-analyses were conducted,
results remained nonsignificant. There was no statistically significant
effect of vitamin D on mammography density observed: mean
difference=0.46, 95% CI: -2.06 to 2.98, p=0.72.
Conclusion: There is insufficient evidence to support the harmness or
efficacy of vitamin D supplementation in breast cancer risk. The efficacy
of using vitamin D on risk of breast cancer from previous observational
studies may be overestimated.
Acknowledgement: Registration: PROSPERO (identifier:
CRD42019138718).
P171
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS AND PERCEIVED WORK
DEMANDS AMONG FEMALE NURSES AT A TERTIARY
CARE HOSPITAL IN INDIA
S. Siddique1
1Kuhs, Malappuram, India
Objective: Musculoskeletal disorders (MSD) are common among
nurses and can affect patient outcomes. Our aim was to measure
prevalence of MSD and their association with perceived work
demands and sociodemographic variables among female nurses at a
tertiary care hospital in South India.
Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted starting June 2018 to
May 2019 through interviewer administered questionnaires which
comprised three parts: sociodemographic data, modified Nordic
questionnaire, and perceived physical and psychological work demands.
Results: 296 nurses with a mean age of 30.4 y participated. Prevalence of
any MSD in the last seven days was 60.5% with low back pain being the
most common and elbow pain the least common. Occurrence of any
MSD was associated with age, number of children, working hours at
home, BMI, and total work experience. High perceived physical demands
score was associated with lower back (OR: 3.06) and knee pain
(OR: 7.73).
Conclusion: Prevalence of MSD was high and occurrence of lower back
and knee MSD was associated with perceived physical demands. This
information should be used as a benchmark and guiding tool for
designing work place interventions to improve working conditions and
health of nurses.
P172
A RISK ASSESSMENT STUDY ON WORK-RELATED
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS AMONG DENTISTS IN
MANGALORE, INDIA
S. Siddique1
1Kuhs, Malappuram, India
Objective: Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) are
responsible for morbidity in many working populations, which are of
multifactorial in origin and of global concern due to industrialization.
Dentists as one of the healthcare professionals who are prone to develop
these WMSDs. The study aims to determine the prevalence of WMSDs
among dentists in Mangalore region and explores the various risk factors
for the development of MSDs and WMSDs.
Methods: This proposed study is a cross-sectional study conducted
among dentists of two randomly selected dental colleges of Mangalore,
India. A structured questionnaire was used to collect the demographic
information, occupational history, risk factors, and ergonomic awareness
with job task details. Prevalidated standardized tools such as quick
exposure check list, rapid entire body assessment score sheet, and
Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire were also used. Data were entered
in MS-Excel and analyzed through SPSS version 22.
Results: More than 92% of the participants reported pain and discomfort
in at least one part of their body. The major affected body part is neck,
followed by the lower back and wrist. More than half of the orthodontists
and oral surgeons reported that their MSDs are work-related origin.
Pearson's correlation test indicated that there is a positive correlation
between the current exposure and risk (r=0.613). Multivariate regression
analysis found that younger participants, male (OR=4.1), involved
physical activity (OR=1.04), dentists not taught about ergonomics in their
dental school (OR=1.69) or never attended any workshops (OR=1.38),
who reported task involving sustained muscle contraction (OR=1.12) or
task with repetitive movements (OR=1.11) are the major risk factors for
the development of MSDs among the dentists.
Conclusion: This risk assessment study found that there is a high
prevalence of MSDs and WMSDs among dentists. Ergonomic awareness
and health promotion need to be integrated with the professional practice
for dentists.
P173
LOW-ENERGY FRACTURE PREDICTION IN PATIENTS
PRESCRIBED ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS: A SWEDISH CASE-
CONTROL STUDY ASSESSING THE VALUE OF BMD AND
TBS
O. Nordqvist1, A. Petersson2, O. Björneld3, L. Brudin2, P. Wanby1, R.
Nobin4, M. Carlsson1
1Dept. of Medicine & Optometry, Linnaeus University, Kalmar, 2Dept. of
Medical & Health Sciences, University of Linköping, Linköping, 3Dept.
of Computer Science & Media Technology, Linnaeus University,
Kalmar, 4Dept. of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden
Objective: Antiepileptic drugs (AED) are known to increase the risk of
low energy fractures by causing secondary osteoporosis. In this study, we
determined the value of BMD and trabecular bone score (TBS) as
predictors for low energy fractures in patients prescribed AED.
Methods: This case-control study included 517 low energy fractures, i.e.,
a combination of ICD-10 codes according to the Swedish National Board
of Health and Welfare's definition of osteoporosis- related fractures and
ICD-10 codes for low energy trauma, in 1385 subjects who had all
participated in a TBS convertible DXA examination between July 2011
and November 2018 in Kalmar county, southeast Sweden. The AED
users were stratified according to cytochrome P-450 enzyme inducing
ability and compared to controls. The dataset was a combination of
previously collected data from the electronic health register (EHR) and
new BMD and TBS data from a DXA database. Univariate and
multivariate logistic regressions were applied.
Results: In this study BMD-spine did not predict low energy fractures;
however, both BMD-hip (aOR: 0.35, 95%CI: 0.24-0.50) and TBS (aOR:
0.65, 95%CI: 0.46-0.92) were inversely related to fractures. Patients
prescribed enzyme inducing AED had an increased fracture odds (aOR:
2.15, 95%CI: 1.24-3.72). There was no difference for fracture outcome
between subjects with noninducing drugs and controls (p-value 0.476). In
this study 67.5% of the TBS convertible DXAs were performed within a
year of the low-energy fracture. Of the included patients, 82% were
women.
Conclusion: While BMD-spine was not associated with low energy
fractures, both BMD-hip and TBS predicted low energy fractures
independently in patients prescribed AED. This is the first study
demonstrating the value of TBS in patients prescribed AED. In clinical
practice, BMD-hip and TBS could be combined to improve the
assessment of bone health in this growing patient group. The value of
the combination of the two measures should be assessed in a future
prospective randomized study.
S144
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P174
ASSESSMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR RISK IN PATIENTS
W I T H C A L C I U M P Y R O P H O S P H A T E C R Y S T A L
DEPOSITION DISEASE AND OSTEOARTHRITIS
M. Eliseev1, O. Zhelyabina1, A. Novikova1, M. Chikina1
1V.A.Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Factors affecting cardiovascular risk (CVR) in patients with
calcium pyrophosphate crystal deposition disease (CPPD) have not been
studied. Our aim was to do a comparison of CVR on the SCORE scale
and the incidence of individual risk factors for cardiovascular diseases
(CVD) in patients with CPPD and osteoarthritis (OA).
Methods: A single-stage, single-center study. The compared groups -
patients with CPPD (n=246) and OA of the knee joints (n=53), from
18-80 years old. The frequency of individual CVR factors was compared
with the results of stratification on the SCORE scale.
Results: The frequency of individual risk factors of CVD in CPPD and
OA did not differ significantly, with the exception of arterial
hypertension, which was detected in 123 (50%) patients with CPPD,
and in 9 (17%) patients with OA, p=0.01. However, the presence of ≥3
of the listed risk factors (smoking, BMI >30 kg/m2, hypertension,
ischemic heart disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic heart failure,
myocardial infarction, serum cholesterol >5.0 mmol/L, uric acid >360
μmol/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) >5 mg/L, glomerular filtration rate
<60 ml/min) was determined in 123 (50%) patients with CPPD, and in
11 (21%) patients with OA (p=0.0002). The CVR on the SCORE scale
was stratified as high or very high in 63% of patients with CPPD and in
38% of patients with OA (p=0.006). The median SCORE index in CPPD
(10 [1.7; 10]) was significantly higher than in OA (3.5 [1.3; 8.6]),
p=0.004. The median serum CRP level was also significantly higher in
CPPD (p<0.001), as well as the number of patients with CRP ≥5 mg/l
(p<0.001).
Conclusion: With a comparable frequency of detection of individual RFs
in patients with CPPD and OA, patients with CPPD have a higher CVR,
when stratified on the SCORE scale, as well as a higher CRP level.
P175
RELIABILITY OF RADIOLOGICAL INDICES IN
C O M P A R I S O N W I T H D X A I N D I A G N O S I S O F
OSTEOPOROSIS
G. Kakadiya1, D. Joshi2
1Fortis Hospital Mohali, Mohali, 21, Mohali, India
Objective: Osteoporosis projects a dominant issue related to health in the
community in developing country like ours, India and is often
unrecognised or undiagnosed. Early diagnosis and treatment of
osteoporosis is of utmost importance. This study evaluates the accuracy
of Radiological Indices in comparison to gold standard DXA scan for
diagnosis of osteoporosis, so that diagnosis of osteoporosis can be done
using simple radiographs which would be cost effective and less exposure
to radiation.
Methods: The is study is a one year hospital based comparative study
which included a total of 80 patients who presented to OPD / IPD of Dept.
of Orthopaedics and met the inclusion criteria were enrolled in the study.
Patients were subjected to DXA scan and a plain radiograph of either of
the hip joint with full length femur in AP and lateral views. Subsequently,
the Singh’s Index, cortical thickness index (CTI) AP and lateral, calcar to
canal ratio (CCR) were measured and compared with the standard DXA
scan. Spearman’s rank coefficient was used to find correlation between
radiological indices and DXA scan, kappa statistics for level of
agreement, sensitivity and specificity for radiological indices was
calculated.
Results: The data analysed showed significant correlation (Spearman
coefficient) between radiological indices and DXA scan. CTI
antero-posterior view and lateral view with cutoff 0.43(r=0.8172,
p<0.0001 and r=0.8243, p<0.0001 respectively), CCR with cutoff 0.50
(r=0.8188, p<0.0001). Similarly for Singh’s index (r=0.6002, p<0.0001).
Conclusion: Radiological indices are reliable in the diagnosis of
osteoporosis and have a good correlation with T-scores deduced by
DXA scan.
P176
PROFILE OF PATIENTS ENROLLED IN A FRACTURE
LIASON SERVICE IN A PRIVATE TERTIARY HOSPITAL IN
CEBU
A. J. Ho1, J. Arbatin1, J. Akol1
1Chong Hua Hospital, Cebu, Philippines
Objective: It is estimated that the number of osteoporotic hip fractures
among Filipinos will reach 65,000 by 2020 and 175,000 by 2050. In an
attempt to improve the identification, diagnosis and treatment of
osteoporosis in the province of Cebu, the Fracture Liaison Service
(FLS) was started. This study aims to evaluate the implementation of this
program for targeting these high-risk groups and improving secondary
fracture prevention. Our aim was to describe the profile and outcome of
patients enrolled in the FLS program in a private, tertiary hospital in Cebu
City.
Methods: All patients enrolled in the FLS of Chong Hua Hospital from
September 2018 to May 2019 were included in this study. A total of 103
patients, above 50 y of age were interviewed and followed up. Utilizing
the Fracture Liaison Assessment Form, the following data were collected:
demographics, comorbidities, presence of fragility fracture or osteopenia,
compliance to DXA scan, treatment compliance, refracture rate and
incidence of falls. Descriptive statistics using frequency count and
percentages were used.
Results: Majority of patients were within the 70-79 years old age group
(33%) and majority were females (73%). Among the 103 enrollees, 32%
had osteopenia while 68% had a fragility fracture involving the hip in
27.18%. While under the FLS care, 90.9% of patients were compliant
with prescribed medications (calcium, antiosteoporotic drugs) and
98.86% were adherent to fall prevention exercises. No incidence of
secondary fractures or falls after discharge.
Conclusion: The FLS care has enhanced the identification, assessment
and initiation of treatment in patients at high risk for osteoporotic fracture.
This approach has improved the pharmacologic compliance of patients
and has helped prevent secondary fractures and falls in all patients
enrolled in the program.
P177
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN TYPE 2 DIABETES AND RISK OF
OSTEOPOROSIS: A NATIONWIDE COHORT STUDY
H.-H. Lin1, H.-Y. Hsu2, M.-C. Tsai1, L.-Y. Hsu3, K.-L. Chien3, T.-L. Yeh4
1Dept. of Family Medicine, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Tamsui Branch,
New Taipei City, 2Dept. of Family Medicine, Mackay Memorial
Hospital, Taipei City, 3Institute of Epidemiology & Preventive
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei City, 4Dept. of Family
Medicine, Hsinchu Mackay Memorial Hospital, Hsinchu City, Taiwan
Objective: Though previous studies have investigated the relationship
between fracture risk and type 2 diabetes (T2D), cohort studies estimating
composite osteoporosis risk have been lacking. The retrospective,
nationwide, cohort study sought to determine the risk of osteoporosis in
a Taiwanese cohort of patients with T2D.
Methods: This included patients diagnosed with T2D between 2002-
2015 identified through the 2002 Taiwan survey of hypertension,
hyperglycemia, and hyperlipidemia. A total of 1690 men and 1641
women aged 40 years old and older linked to the National Health
S145
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) were followed up until the end of
2015 to determine incidences of osteoporosis through ICD9-CM codes
for osteoporosis or osteoporotic fractures or use of antiosteoporotic agents
according to anatomical therapeutic chemical codes retrieved from the
NHIRD. The person-year approach and Kaplan-Meier analysis were then
used to estimate incidences and cumulative event rates, while Cox
proportional hazard models were used to calculate adjusted hazard ratios
(HR) for osteoporosis events.
Results: A total of 792 new osteoporosis events were documented over a
median follow-up of 13.6 y. Compared to participants without T2D, those
with T2D had higher osteoporosis risk [adjusted HR: 1.37, 95%CI: 1.11-
1.69]. Subgroup analyses revealed that age had a marginally significant
effect, indicating that T2D had more pronounced effect on osteoporosis
risk in younger populations (<65 years old). No difference was found
between patients stratified by gender.
Conclusion: T2D was significantly associated with increased risk for
osteoporosis, especially in younger participants.
P178
REFERENCE VALUES FOR VITAMIN D FROM DOCTOR’S
PERSPECTIVE
N. N. Katamadze1, A. S. Shutova1, H. R. Fargieva1, V. S. Glazieva2, A.
A. Povaliaeva1, E. A. Pigarova1, L. K. Dzeranova1, I. M. Belovalova1, I.
I. Dedov1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, 2Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Moscow, Russia
Objective: The connection between vitamin D deficiency and
osteoporosis is well established. Vitamin D hypovitaminosis also might
predispose to inflammatory states and autoimmune diseases. On the
opposite, vitamin D toxicity can cause symptoms such as nausea,
vomiting, constipation, pancreatitis, acute kidney injury, weight loss,
dehydration, altered mental status and lead to the development of life-
threatening conditions. Subsequently the precision of a vitamin D
reference range is of paramount importance in patient’s health outcomes.
Total 25-hydroxyvitamin D is considered as the most representative
metabolite of vitamin D status. However, the reference values of 25-
hydroxyvitamin D has not yet been fully elucidated and much debated
during the past decades. The aim of our survey was to assess the level of
awareness on upper and lower limits of the reference range for 25-
hydroxyvitamin D among practicing doctors.
Methods: We conducted the national survey on reference values for
vitamin D status among physicians specialized in various fields.
Endocrinologists accounted for 80% of them.
Results: In our survey, we found that out of 704 physicians 77 (10.9%)
and 45 (6.4%) considered 25 nmol/L and 50 nmol/L as the lower limits of
the reference interval, respectively. On the other hand, 111 (15.8%), 115
(16.3%) and 36 (5.1%) physicians considered 375 nmol/L, 150 nmol/l
and 75 nmol/L as the upper limits of the reference interval, respectively.
Conclusion: Currently, the question of the optimal concentrations of
25(OH)D in the blood serum stays open. Raising awareness among health
care providers in this area, as well as on the characteristics of calcium-
phosphorus metabolism, will help maintain adequate vitamin D levels
and avoid excessive supplementation. At the present, clinicians
prescribing vitamin D, in order to avoid undesirable consequences for
the patient's health, should exercise caution.
P179
CURRENT THERAPIES IN OSTEOPOROSIS: NEW
PERSPECTIVES OR IS IT ENOUGH?
C. Ciofu1, B. Gavrila1, I. Ancuta1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: the discovery of biological therapies was a big step forward in
the management of patients with osteoporosis and rheumatic diseases.
Although the therapeutic offer seems sufficient, in the clinic, we continue
to meet patients in whom apparently we still need new progresses.
Methods: We present the case of a 68-year-old man known with
surgically treated mixed pulmonary adenocarcinoma, ankylosing
spondylitis and osteoporosis of complex etiology, who presented to the
Internal Medicine and Rheumatology Clinic Dr. I. Cantacuzino in
December 2020 for intense pain in the lumbar spine, with insidious onset
and aggravated in the last few days. From the patient's history we notice
the left lower lobectomy for pulmonary adenocarcinoma (April 2013),
recently diagnosed with ankylosing spondylitis (March 2019 when it was
first seen in our clinic), osteoporosis-DXA examination (March 2019,
score T -3.1. FRAX score 22% for major osteoporotic fracture, 15% for
hip fracture), type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure. He received
treatment with multiple NSAIDs (currently diclofenac 150 mg, and given
the risks associated with osteoporosis, he received treatment with
alendronate 70 mg/week, calcium 1 g, and vitamin D 2000 IU). At the
objective examination we find typical changes of ankylosing spondylitis
axial form with kyphotic thorax, significant pain in the percussion of the
thoracic spinous processes, in a fixed point, T10-T12 area, with marked
limitation of joint mobility. Biological investigations and composite
scores for measuring ankylosing spondylitis activity reveal a disease with
intense activity (BASDAI score 8.7, ASDAS-CRP 3.9). Current DXA
exam T-score -3.3. Imaging, multiple thoracic vertebral fractures are
identified (T9-T12).
Results: At this time, the patient needs to escalate the therapy for the
autoimmune rheumatic disease and rethink the therapeutic regimen for
the treatment of osteoporosis.
Conclusion: In such a patient, given the history of malignancy, the severe
course of ankylosing spondylitis requiring biological treatment and
complications on a rigid spine, with complex, progressive osteoporosis,
despite oral bisphosphonate treatment, is there an ideal solution? Do we
need to change the route of administration (intravenous bisphosphonates)
or associate biological treatment (anti-TNF and anti-RANKL) under strict
supervision?
P180
IMPACT OF HOMOCYSTEINE LEVELS ON BONE MINERAL
DENSITY IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH
ANKYLOSING SPONDYLITIS WITH ANTI-TNFα THERAPY
D. Anghel1, L. Otlocan2, O. Petrache3, C. Mijea3, M. M. Negru4
1Carol Davila Central Military University Hospital, 2Sfanta Maria Clinic,
3Dr. Carol Davila Central Military University Hospital, 4Sfanta Maria
Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Osteoporosis is common complication in women with
ankylosing spondylitis (AS), after menopause, even in early stages of
the disease. Homocysteine (HCY) levels interferes with collagen
crosslinking in bones and may affect BMD. The aim of our study was
to follow the influence of HCY levels and 25-OH-vitamin D levels on
BMD, in AS patients treated with anti-TNFα agents and antiosteoporotic
treatment.
Methods: We recruited 55 postmenopausal women with AS between the
age group of 47-75 y. All patients were in treatment with anti-TNFα
agents (adalimumab, infliximab, etanercept). We measured BMD at
baseline and then at 12 months. BMD was determined by DXA scan.
Based on the WHO criteria, patients were included into 2 groups as
follows: patients with osteopenia and patients with osteoporosis. We
followed activity disease by BASDAI score and laboratory parameters:
HCY, 25-OH-D3, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR), BASDAI score and serum calcium. The patients received
specific antiosteoporotic treatment (bisphosphonates, vitamin D
supplementation and calcium supplementation).
S146
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: Among 57 postmenopausal women at baseline 61.40% (35) had
osteoporosis (mean age 56.2±6.9 y) and 38.59% (22) had osteopenia
(mean age 54.56±6.5 y). We found high levels of HCY in 68,4% (39)
of the patients while the rest of them had normal levels. After 12 months
of antiosteoporotic treatment in the group of patients with osteoporosis
and high HCY level, BMD increased less compared to patients with
osteoporosis and normal HCY level. Regarding patients with osteopenia,
there was no significant difference in BMD between patients with
elevated, respectively normal levels of HCY. Hyperhomocysteinemia
was positively correlated with low levels of 25-OH-vitamin D
(p=0.001), serum calcium (p<0.005) but also with increased disease
activity (increased ESR, CRP and BASDAI score). There were no
differences between HCY levels and BMD depending on the type of
anti-TNFα agent.
Conclusion: Hyperhomocysteinemia and low levels of vitamin D were
correlated with low BMD. Patients with AS in postmenopausal with
elevated HCY levels had a poorer response to antiosteoporotic treatment.
P181
CLINICAL REMISSION IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
PATIENTS TREATED WITH TOFACITINIB IS ASSOCIATED
WITH LOW BASELINE EXPRESSION OF PYRUVATE
KINASE AND SUCCINATE DEHYDROGENASE GENES IN
THE PERIPHERAL BLOOD
E. Tchetina1, A. Satybaldyev1, G. Markova1
1Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To investigate the importance of baseline expression of genes
involved in energy generation in RA patients, which could serve
prognostic biomarkers for treatment response to tofacitinib (TFCN).
Methods: Peripheral blood of 28 RA patients aged 52.2±15.6 years old,
average disease duration 3.5 y (range 0.6-19) treated with TFCN (5-
10 mg twice a day) during three months and 26 healthy age-matched
control subjects were examined. Clinical response was assessed by
disease activity score (DAS28-ESR), serum levels of ACPA antibodies,
rheumatoid factor
(RF), C-reactive protein (CRP), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR). Clinical remission
was assessed according to ACR criteria and DAS28 (DAS28 <2.6).
Protein concentrations
were measured using ELISA. Total RNA was isolated from whole blood
and used in gene expression studies performed with quantitative real-time
RT-PCR.
Results: All of the patients were Steinbrocker’s radiographic stage II-III
at baseline. The majority of patients demonstrated erosive arthritis (23 out
of 28), they were ACPA- (25 out of 28) and RF- (24 out of 28) positive.
TFCN treatment significantly decreased the disease activity according to
DAS28. At the end of the study majority of patients demonstrated
moderate disease activity (3.2< DAS28 <5.1), four patients retained high
disease activity while 7 attained remission (DAS28 <2.6). This was
accompanied by significant decrease in CRP and the number of swollen
and tender joints. Gene and protein expression analyses revealed that RA
patients, which attained clinical remission following TFCN treatment
demonstrated significantly lower baseline expression of genes associated
with glycolysis (pyruvate kinase) and oxidative phosphorylation
(succinate dehydrogenase) compared to other examined RA patients.
Moreover, these gene expressions increased in the course of follow-up
in RA patients who attained clinical remission.
Conclusion: Clinical remission attainment in RA patients treated with
tofacitinib was associated with lower baseline expression of genes
involved in energy generation pathways (pyruvate kinase and succinate
dehydrogenase) compared to other examined subjects.
P182
ASSESSMENT OF MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS IN
PROFESSIONAL SONOGRAPHERS
K. Nassar1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., Hassan II
University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: The musculoskeletal disorders, ultrasound origin, are defined
as the clinical manifestations that are either caused by or aggravated by
ultrasound exams at the workplace in professional sonographers. They
are an occupational health problem for physicians and have a reported
incidence of 90%. These conditions have a health and an emotional
impact on the worker. Due to the multiplicity of disciplines that currently
carry out ultrasound examinations, the purpose of this study is to assess
the different musculoskeletal disorders in relation with ultrasound, their
impact and monitoring, through the experience of ultrasonographers.
Methods: This is a survey comprising questions to single or multiple
choices, addressed to different categories of physicians performing ultra-
sound. The first part is about the practitioner’s information and experiences.
The second one regarding the number of ultrasounds performed per week,
the ergonomics at workplace, the different musculoskeletal
manifestations attributed to the ultrasound examination, their impact on
professional and family life and finally their management and monitoring.
Results: For two weeks, 151 physicians accepted to answer to the
questionnaires. The mean age was 44 years old. The sex-ratio F/H is 2,3.
These are 60 rheumatologists, 52 radiologists, 19 general practitioners, 12
gastroenterologist and 8 other specialties (gynecology, nephrology,
cardiology, internal medicine). The exercise duration was >10 y in
43.7%. 42.3% of physicians do the ultrasound for >5 y and 67.3% more
than three times a week. Every week, 40% do between 20-50 ultrasound
exams. 28% of participants do physical activities with charging port.
Concerning the general posture, the majority do the sonographers are while
sitting and standing and 18.5% are constantly seated. 45.2% monitor their
posture from time to time, 38% have a repetitive load at work. 54,3% do not
have a touch screen ultrasound and 44.4% have a seat of work without
backrest. 90.7% of partitioners have already suffered of musculoskeletal
disorders after performing ultrasound and not explained by another cause.
The most frequent localizations are shoulders, cervical spine, wrists, elbows
and hands. The table summarizes the different musculoskeletal
manifestations, their impact and their management.
Conclusion: 80-90% of sonographers will experience pain whilst
scanning at some stage during their career (1,2). Musculoskeletal
disorders are a significant concern for sonographers with detrimental
effects on the individual, patients and the employer. The causes for these
injuries are multifactorial; especially individual; gender, state of health
postures, biomechanics, organizational, material and psychosocial. This
is correlated with the exponential solicitation of sonographers but also
with the high number of patients. Our study joined the results of the
literature about the high frequency of musculoskeletal disorders in
partitioner’s sonographers and about the risk factors of these disorders.
There is a variety of solutions for mitigating injury risk. Sonographer
work postures, work schedules, task rotation, administrative support,
and ergonomic workplace equipment all enter into the formula for
reducing the incidence of these disorders.
References:
1.
Jakes C. J Diagnostic Med Sonography 2001;17:74.
2.
Mason B, et al. Sound Effects News 2014;3:26.
Table: Summary of the different musculoskeletal manifestations, their
impact and their management by the participants.
Number (%)
Clinical disorders (pain, stiffness, numbness, uncomforted),
after ultrasound not explain by another causes:
-
From time to time
93 (61.6)
S147
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
-
Often
-
Never
-
Just after the ultrasound exam
40 (26.2)
14 (2.3)
4 (2.6)
Localizations of the musculoskeletal disorders:
-
Shoulders
-
Cervical spine
-
Wrist
-
Elbows
-
Hands
-
Others
104 (75.9)
55 (40.1)
50 (36.5)
23(16.8)
22(16.1)
13 (9.5)
Partitioners who attribute the disorders to the
nature of the ultrasound requested: the time
of the examination, the position it demands.
- Those who answered that the problems occur
whatever the type of ultrasound requested
-Other answers
34 (60.7)
19 (33.9)
3 (5.4)
MS disorders affect the family life:
-
Low level
-
Moderate
-
High
109 (72.2)
35 (23.2)
7(4.6)
MS disorders affect the quality or performance of your work
-
Low level
-
Moderate
-
High
116 (76.8)
31 (20.5)
4 (2.6)
Use of medication or consultations in the past 12
months because of the MS disorders:
-
Automedication
-
Specialist consult
-
Never
69 (45.7)
47 (47.5)
56 (37.1)
Use of symptomatic treatments in the last 12 months
98 64.9)
-Physiotherapy plus medical treatment
-Immobilization of the member affected
35 (32.7)
20 (18.7)
Evolution
- Good
- Partial, with MS manifestations after ultrasound
- MS signs still persist
63 (53.4)
42 (35.6)
13 (11%)
MS: musculoskeletal.
P183
OSTEOPOROSIS RISK FACTORS IN PATIENTS WITH
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
K. Nassar1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., Hassan II
University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Osteoporosis is one of the major complications of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). It is essential to identify risk factors
for osteoporosis whether general or specific to the intestinal disease. The
objective of this study is to determine the prevalence and the risk factors
of osteoporosis in patients with IBD.
Methods: One-year retrospective study conducted in patients followed in
gastroenterology departments and admitted in rheumatology for bone
status assessment. Inclusion criteria are patients aged over 20 y followed
for IBD. Exclusion criteria are patients with musculoskeletal or other
general disease that could have an impact on bone density. We have
compared the demographic characteristics of both groups: osteoporotic
(group 1) and not osteoporotic (Group 2). We then assessed the risk
factors of bone loss.
Results: 46 patients have been included. It was about 27 men and 19
women. The average age was 38 y (20-67). The type of IBD was Crohn’s
disease in 71% cases and 29% followed for ulcerative colitis (UC). The
median disease duration was 7 y. 13 patients have osteoporosis in at least
1 site among the lumbar spine, femoral neck and total hip (Group 1) and
33 patients were not osteoporotic. The osteoporosis risk factors were
menopause in 37%, corticosteroid in 60%, smoking in 19.5%, the
insufficient intake calcium was noted in 69.5% and insufficient physical
activity in 8.7%. The table blow determines the characteristic
demographic of both groups and the risk factors of bone loss. The two
significant risk factors were age and Crohn’s disease.
Conclusion: Osteoporosis commonly affects patients with IBD and many
risk factors have been identified in literature. Based on the guidelines,
patients at risk should have an assessment of BMD, in order to prevent or
treat osteoporosis in early stage. In our study, factors significantly
associated with osteoporosis were age and the type of IBD with a greater
frequency of osteoporosis in Crohn’s disease. Unlike gender, low BMI,
and malabsorption that do not seem to matter as in literature in our study,
probably because of the limited number of patients. Routine screening for
osteoporosis and its risk factors should be systematic in patients with
IBD.
Reference: Ostlander AE, et al. Gastroenterology 2011;140:116
Table: Characteristic demographic of the population and assessment of
bone loss risk factors.
Group I
(osteoporotic)
n=13
Group II
(without
osteoporosis)
n=33
P
Average age
45.76±12.88
35.36±9.94
0.01
Sex
F
7
12
0.27
M
6
21
Disease
duration
8.84±6.29
5.51±5.79
0.11
Surgery
Yes
8
13
0.17
No
5
20
BM
22.9±3.64
21.54±4.78
0.30
History of corticosteroid therapy
Yes
9
19
0.46
No
4
14
Disease type
Crohn’s
12
21
0.051
RCH
1
12
Vitamin D value
<30
13
29
>30
0
3
Calcium value
(average)
93.95±6.70
116.82±130.91
0.33
Past smoking
Yes
2
6
0.82
No
11
27
Adequate physical activity
Yes
11
32
0.12
No
2
1
S148
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Calcium intake
Yes
5
10
0.59
No
8
23
P184
HEALTHCARE RESOURCE UTILISATION AND COSTS
AMONG PATIENTS WITH MODERATE TO SEVERE
OSTEOARTHRITIS PAIN: A NONINTERVENTIONAL
RETROSPECTIVE COHORT STUDY IN SALFORD, UK
L. Abraham1, K. Halsby1, B. Emir2, H. Stevenson1
1Pfizer Ltd., Surrey, UK, 2Pfizer, New York, USA
Objective: Compare healthcare resource utilisation (HCRU) and costs
between patients with moderate to severe osteoarthritis (OA) pain and
those without OA using the Salford Integrated Record (2010-2017).
Methods: For each patient, HCRU (GP, inpatient, outpatient, and A&E
visits) and total direct costs (HCRU and prescribed analgesic drugs per
UK standardised tariffs) were calculated and compared with propensity
matched controls for the year post-index (cost by 2-part model; HCRU by
t-test).
Results: 3123 patients with moderate to severe OA pain (1922 severe)
were indexed alongside 3123 controls without OA (60.2/60.9% female;
mean age 63.8/63.4 y, median CCI: 3/3, respectively). Total direct costs
(£2519 vs. £1379) and all categories of HCRU, except GP home visits,
were significantly higher in the year post-index among patients with
moderate to severe OA pain than in controls (Table). Highest mean costs
in both cohorts were for inpatient admissions (£1517 vs. £770) and
outpatient visits (£674 vs. £407). Total mean analgesia costs were ~3-
fold higher (£110 vs. £39) and covered a broader range of drug classes in
patients with moderate to severe OA pain than in controls. Paracetamol
(40% had ≥1 prescription) and strong opioids (34%) were the most
prescribed analgesics to patients with moderate to severe OA pain.
Conclusion: Patients with moderate to severe OA pain have considerably
higher HCRU and incur almost double the annual direct costs of patients
without OA.
Disclosure: Funded by Pfizer & Eli Lilly. Norman Stein and Bozydar
Wrona of NorthWest EHealth contributed to the study design and data
analysis. LA, KH, BE and HS are employees of Pfizer and hold stock/
stock options.
Table. Annual healthcare resource use and costs
Mod/sev OA pain
Matched controls
n
3123
3123
Total annual direct cost
£2519 (3511)
£1379 (3787)
comprising
GP
£149 (214)
£107 (201)
Inpatient
£1517 (2809)
£770 (2717)
Outpatient
£674 (1213)
£407 (1726)
A&E
£70 (167)
£55 (149)
Analgesic drugsa
£110 (260)
£39 (190)
Annual healthcare resource utilisation
GP
visit
3.61 (4.13)
2.04 (2.85)
phone call
1.52 (3.04)
1.08 (2.22)
home visit
0.20 (1.24)
0.29 (1.40)
Inpatient
0.74 (1.30)
0.57 (4.40)
Outpatient
11.19 (14.17)
5.85 (18.68)
A&E
0.48 (1.10)
0.35 (0.90)
Mean and costs±SD per patient in the year post-index.
All p<0.05 between cohorts.
aOpioid, nonopioid and adjuvant analgesics.
mod/sev, moderate to severe.
P185
CAPTURE THE FRACTURE: EXPERIENCE OF OUR FLS IN
ARGENTINA
H. C. Habib1, F. C. Firpo1, G. F. Geraci1
1Sanatorio Las Lomas, Buenos Aires, Argentina
We present the data and achievements of our pioneer Fracture Liaison
Service (FLS) in Argentina, after 4 y of the Capture the Fracture program,
within the Sanatorio Las Lomas private hospital. The aim is to evaluate
our FLS consolidation after its implementation, taking in account the
obstacles we faced and the experiences we obtained.
Our secondary prevention program was launched during 2017, developed
and attended by the Endocrinology and Metabolism Dept.’s medical staff.
Immediately the Orthopedic Dept. joined us. We identified and gathered
fractured patients in emergency, ambulatory and hospitalized rooms.
During the first visit we included physical exam, personal and familiar
medical history, BMD evaluation by DXA scan with TBS and FRAX
algorithm and mineral metabolism laboratory testing. From 521 included
patients, the fracture index was: 30.4% radius, 17.1% femoral, 16%
vertebral, 11.6% tibial, 4% humerus and 11% other sites. Comparing
April 2021 vs. April 2020, despite SARS-Cov-2 pandemic, we achieved
an increase in patients recruitment (46.64%), doubling the number. We
attribute this to our increased efforts by contacting fractured patients by
telephone, offering medical assistance. The refracture index was 20%,
with 25% of these patients suffering a third fracture. The centinel fracture
and the most predictive of a second episode was the radius fracture.
In the next chart we present the numbers achieved in our private hospital
FLS.
P186
WHICH IS THE BEST ANTIRESORPTIVE TREATMENT
AFTER FINISHING TERIPARATIDE? BEST POST-
TERIPARATIDE TREATMENT
S. M. Sarli1, H. C. Habib2, Z. B. Zanchetta1
1Instituto de Investigaciones Metabólicas, 2Maestría en Osteología,
Universidad del Salvador, Buenos Aires, Argentina
S149
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Anabolic drugs are the treatment of choice for osteoporotic patients with
very high risk of fractures. Postanabolic treatment an antiresorptive drug
maintains the BMD gained. The recommendations regarding the ideal
antiresorptive drug are not precise. The aim of this paper is to compare
the usefulness of zoledronate and denosumab in a group of 28 women
with very high risk of fractures. All of them completed at least one year of
treatment with teriparatide and latter 14 received zolendronate and 14
denosumab for another year. We retrospectively review their biochemical
and densitometric changes. Both treatment groups experienced a
reduction in bone turnover markers of the same magnitude at the end of
the second year. In Lumbar Spine BMD increase of 3.96±8.56% median
(Me) 2.54 p 0.21 in zolendronate group and 3.55±5.36% (Me 5.14) p 0.07
in denosumab group. Femoral neck BMD changed -0.09±6.50% (Me
0.29) p 0.85 in zolendronate group, and -3.41±5.08% (Me 5.35) p 0.59
in denosumab group, with no difference between both groups. In total hip
BMD an increase of 0.55±4.20% (Me 0.43) p 0.70 in zoledronate group,
and 4.53±5.13% (Me 0.64) P 0.04 with denosumab. We conclude that
both antiresorptive treatments have a similar effect in biochemical
markers after one year of treatment. BMD increase significantly in total
hip and changed with a trend in lumbar spine with denosumab, but
without differences between both groups of treatment.
Table. Baseline characteristics and densitometric results of the subgroups.
The results are expressed as media±SD; when the standard deviation is very
large, they are also expressed as median (Me). Baseline BMD is BMD prior
to teriparatide therapy and post- antiresorptive. BMD is BMD after
teriparatide and one year with zoledronate or denosumab. * Median of
changes between BMD post-teriparatide and post- antiresorptive
Table.
Zoledronate
Denosumab
P
N
14
14
NS
Age (y)
66.7±13
64.7±8.3
0.64
BMI (kg/m2)
23±3.1
25±4.3
0.21
Calcium intake (mg/d)
893.5±448
725±419
0.33
Previous bisphosphonates
8/14 (57%)
9/14 (64%)
0.64
Months of previous
bisphosphonates
58.67
±70.62
71.77±55
0.66
Teriparatide (months)
20.28±4.76
18±5
0.22
Baseline BMD LS (g/cm2)
0.831±0.07
0.875±0.08
0.01
Baseline BMD FN (g/cm2)
0.706±0.04
0.702±0.14
0.94
Baseline BMD TH (g/cm2)
0.644±0.09
0.637±0.04
0.89
Postantiresorptive
BMD LS
0.952
±0.125
p 0.21 *
2.54% *
0.838±0.05
p 0.07*
5.14%*
p 0.88
Postantiresorptive
BMD FN
0.724±0.06
p 0.85*
0.29% *
0.712±0.11
p 0.59*
5.35% *
0.37
Postantiresorptive TH
0.678±0.07
p 0.70*
0.43%*
0.700±0.05
p 0.04*
4.64% *
0.11
Vertebral fractures
9/14
7/14
0.70
Hip fractures
4/14
1/14
0.32
Other fractures
6/14
4/14
0.69
CTX (ug/ml)
424±234
511±158
0.20
Osteocalcin (ng/ml)
26.42±17
27.26±11
0.60
Vit D (ng/ml)
30.81±9.9
33.51±20
0.70
PTH (pg/ml)
45.02±13.6
47.45±19.8
0.18
P187
ONE-YEAR LEVEL OF SUSTAINED LOW ACTIVITY OF
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS AND OVERWEIGHT/OBESITY:
DATA FROM REAL CLINICAL PRACTICE
T. Shivacheva1
1Medical University, Prof. Dr. P. Stoianov-Varna, Varna, Bulgaria
Objective: To determine the level of one-year low activity as a result of
treatment with biological drugs and the impact of overweight/obesity.
Methods: A retrospective study of an administrative data of RA patients
(according to the ACR 1987). The analysis period covers one year of
long-term biological therapy. The patients went through a rheumatology
office, St. Marina University Hospital, Varna, Bulgaria in the period
June 2017 to September 2018. Sociodemographic indicators, BMI (kg/
m2), RA activity (according to SDAI) were analysed. A sustained low
activity (LDA) was accepted at SDAI values below 11 for each of the
three consecutive visits (at 6 months). Statistical processing was
performed with descriptive statistics, chi-square, independent t-test,
logistic regression. Significance level of p<0.05 is used.
Results: 190 patients were included, mostly women (85.8%) with a mean
age of 58.7 (±11.3) with long-standing RA (12.1 y ±9.2) during treatment
with biologics (3.7 y ±2.1). The mean BMI was 26.8 kg/m2 (±5.2). No
gender difference was found in BMI. 55.3% of patients were overweight
(p>0.05), 23.2% were obese (p<0.001). Patients received TNFi or IL6i
(55.4% and 44.6%, p>0.05). One-year LDA was found in 32.6% of
patients (p<0.001). Regardless of the type of biologic therapy, patients
with a BMI <30 kg/m2 were two and a half times more likely to be in a
sustained LDA than in obese patients (OR 2.64, 95%CI 1.14-6.09). In
TNFi treatment, a BMI <30 kg/m2 was associated with an almost 4-fold
higher chance of the patient being in the LDA than in obese patients (OR
3.9 95%CI 1.24-12.52). In IL6i treatment, obesity is not defined as a
factor that is associated with a lower chance of the patient being in a 1-
y LDA.
Conclusion: One year of low RA activity is rarely achieved in real
clinical conditions. Being overweight/obese makes this goal even more
difficult. In these patients, treatment with IL6i appears to be the better
choice.
P188
PERSISTENCE WITH OSTEOPOROSIS TREATMENT IN
PATIENTS FROM THE LILLE UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL
FRACTURE LIAISON SERVICE
A. Delbar1, J. Paccou1, A. Pflimlin1, I. Delabrière2, C. Ternynck3, C.
Chantelot4, F. Puisieux2, B. Cortet1
1Lille University Hospital - Dept. of Rheumatology, 2Lille University
Hospital - Dept. of Gerontology, 3Lille University Hospital - METRICS
- Évaluation des technologies de la santé et des pratiques médicales, 4Lille
University Hospital - Dept. of Traumatology, Lille, France
Objective: A Fracture Liaison Service (FLS) was set up at Lille
University Hospital in 2016. The purpose of this study was to assess
persistence with osteoporosis treatment in patients from the FLS over a
period of 1 year, and to determine predictors of discontinuation.
Methods: The study population comprised adults of both genders, aged
50 or over, admitted to Lille University Hospital between January 2016
and January 2019 for a low-trauma fracture and managed in our FLS.
Outcomes included (1) persistence rate at 1 year after treatment initiation,
(2) persistence rate at 2 years after treatment initiation, (3) persistence rate
at 1 and 2 years after treatment initiation according to type of treatment,
(4) predictors of non-persistence, and (5) reasons for discontinuing
treatment over 1 year after initiation. Persistence was determined using
the Kaplan-Meier method.
Results: In all, 1224 patients (≥50 years old) with a recent history of
low-trauma fracture (≤12 months) were identified. Of these, 380 patients
S150
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
– 79.2% female; mean (SD) age 76 (11) years – were seen at the FLS. In
those 380 patients, 410 fractures were found and 360 of them (87.8%)
were major fractures, breaking down as follows: vertebra (44%), hip
(19%), proximal humerus (10%), and pelvis (8%). Osteoporosis treatment
was prescribed for 367 (96.6%) patients and 275 of them began the
prescribed treatment. The following anti-osteoporosis drugs were
prescribed: zoledronic acid (n=150, 54.5%), teriparatide (n=63, 22.9%),
and denosumab (n=39, 14.2%). Oral bisphosphonates were prescribed for
a few patients (n=23, 8.4%). Persistence with osteoporosis medication (any
class) was estimated at 84.1% (95%CI: 79.1% to 88.1%) at 12-month
follow-up, and dropped to 70.3% (95%CI: 63.7% to 75.9%) at 24 months.
When drug-specific analyses were performed using the Kaplan*Meier
method, persistence rates at 12 and 24 months were found to be higher
with denosumab than with any other treatment. Independent predictors of
nonpersistence at 12 months were ‘follow-up performed by a general
practitioner (GP)’ – odds ratio (OR) for GP vs. FLS=3.68; 95%CI, 1.52
to 8.90, p=0.004 – and ‘treatment with zoledronic acid’ – OR for zoledronic
acid vs. denosumab=3.39; 95%CI, 1.21 to 9.50, p=0.019; OR for
zoledronic acid vs. teriparatide=8.86; 95%CI, 1.15 to 68.10, p=0.035.
Conclusion: This study provides evidence of the success of our FLS in
terms of long-term persistence with osteoporosis treatments. However,
osteoporosis treatment initiation still needs to be improved.
P189
AN APPROPRIATE INTERVENTION THRESHOLD BY FRAX®
TOOL FOR PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT OF
OSTEOPOROSIS IN THAILAND
T. Amphansap1, C. Phan-Udom1, P. Chotiyarnwong2, A. Therdyothin1,
N. Stitkitti1
1Police General Hospital, 2Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand
Objective: Osteoporosis is a common medical condition amongst the
elderly population. The consequences of osteoporotic fractures are
associated with high morbidity and mortality rates, as well as an
economic burden. Presently, Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX)
has been recommended and incorporated into over 100 osteoporotic
guidelines worldwide. However, the appropriate intervention threshold
for osteoporosis treatment in Thailand is still unknown. The aim of this
study was to identify an appropriate cut point of Thai 10-y probability of
major osteoporotic fracture (MOF) intervention thresholds in Thai
population.
Methods: In this cross-sectional study, we analyzed data collected by
filling questionnaires for online FRAX tool evaluation of 1311 Thai
population aged 50-90 years old seen at Police General Hospital and
Siriraj Hospital, from January 2018 to January 2020. The determined
results from the FRAX tool were analyzed through receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve to identify the cut-point of the new
intervention threshold.
Results: Based on the ROC curve, the appropriate intervention threshold
for FRAX 10-y probability of major osteoporotic fracture with maximum
area under the curve of 0.54 at 95%CI was 10% with the sensitivity and
the specificity of 55% and 54.5%, respectively.
Conclusion: This study interpreted an appropriate cut point of Thai MOF
intervention thresholds for osteoporosis treatment, and the value of 10%
was found to be similar to other Asian countries (Hong Kong, Japan, and
Sri Lanka) and can guide a therapeutic decision in Thailand.
P190
SUPPLEMENTAL VIDEO PODCASTS IN OSTEOPOROSIS
FOR ORTHOPAEDIC RESIDENT PHYSICIANS DURING
COVID-19 PANDEMIC IN THAILAND
T. Amphansap1, A. Therdyothin1
1Police General Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand
Objective: COVID-19 pandemic has posed challenges to medical
education. Video podcasts are offered to students to compensate loss of
lecture hours. Efficacy of video podcasts, however, are still controversial.
Methods: We developed 22 video podcasts covering major topics in
osteoporosis and metabolic bone diseases. Of 37 orthopaedic residents
at Police General Hospital recruited, 18 watched the videos. Participants
completed pre-exposure 60 multiple choice questions and a self-
assessment questionnaire. They were given one month to study, after
which the postexposure test, self-assessment form and preference survey
were completed.
Results: With numerically lower pretest scores (47.59±9.77% in video
group, 53.95±9.77% in traditional group, p=0.056), students in the video
group significantly outperformed the traditional group in the post-test
(89.81%±3.83% in video group, 76.93%±10.92% in traditional group,
p<0.001). Juniors watching videos also scored higher than seniors. Gain
of confidence and perceived ability was greater with the videos. However,
students still preferred live lectures over an entire course of videos.
Conclusion: This study showed better improvement in performance and
confidence using supplemental video podcasts. Juniors tended to improve
more watching videos. We suggest providing video podcasts during early
years as a supplement during the pandemic and as a new normal
residency training.
P191
COMPARISON OF BONE MINERAL DENSITY IN
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN BETWEEN FRACTURE
DISTAL END RADIUS CASES AND WITHOUT FRACTURES:
PROSPECTIVE STUDY IN POLICE GENERAL HOSPITAL
T. Amphansap1, C. Rattanaphonglekha1, J. Vechasilp1, A. Therdyothin1,
N. Stitkitti1, K. Apiromyanont2
1Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, 2Dept. of Radiology, Police General
Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand
Objective: Distal radius fracture is universally accepted as one of major
osteoporotic fractures. Few patients suffering of this type of fracture,
however, has undergone proper assessment for future fracture risk,
leading to underdiagnosis of osteoporosis and undertreatment after this
type of fragility fracture. This study aimed to compare age- and site-
related BMD in Thai menopausal women with distal end radius fracture
with those without fracture, and to investigate the role of vertebral fracture
assessment (VFA) in diagnosing osteoporosis after distal radius fracture.
Methods: We performed a prospective study, in 50 postmenopausal
women with distal radius fracture, and 111 controls. BMD of the femoral
neck (FN BMD), total hip (TH BMD), lumbar spine (LS BMD), and
VFA were obtained from DXA scans performed within 2 weeks of injury.
The site-specific BMDs were compared between the two groups using
independent T-test.
Results: The mean BMD was significantly lower at all sites in the fracture
group (FN BMD 0.5899±0.075 vs. 0.6714±0.090, p-value=0.0074; TH
BMD 0.7415±0.103 vs. 0.8276±0.116, p-value=0.0093; LS BMD
0.7988±0.107 vs. 0.8899±0.111, p-value=0.0094 in fracture vs. non-
fracture group, respectively). According to the WHO criteria, 23(46%)
of the fracture group were defined as having osteoporosis, 25(50%)
having osteopenia, 2(4%) having normal BMD, whereas 18(16%) of
the nonfracture group had osteoporosis, 60(54%) had osteopenia, and
33(30%) had normal BMD. VFA increased the yield for diagnosis of
osteoporosis with a number needed to treat of 10.
Conclusion: Postmenopausal women with distal radius fracture had lower
BMD at all sites compared to those without fracture. These results suggest
that every postmenopausal woman aged 50 and over with distal radius
fracture from a low energy trauma should be investigated for osteoporosis.
VFA aided in diagnosing osteoporosis, as it detected unknown vertebral
fractures in approximately one-tenth of patients. Hence, BMD plus VFA
may become a new standard of diagnosing osteoporosis.
S151
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P192
SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM WITH SEVERE
OSTEOPOROSIS AFTER BILIO-PANCREATIC DIVERSION:
CLINICAL CASE REPORT
E. Kim1, E. Ershova1, E. Troshina1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objectives: Obesity is an important public health scourge worldwide,
which lately reached epidemic proportion. Bariatric surgery is the most
effective way to cut and maintain weight among patients with morbid
obesity. One of the methods is biliopancreatic diversion (BPD) which has
the most frequent complications associated with macro- and
micronutrient malabsorption.
Methods: We present a case of a 50-year-old female patient with
secondary osteoporosis developed into severe osteoporosis after a BPD
treatment performed 6 years previously. In the postoperative period, the
necessary replacement therapy with calcium, vitamin D and other micro-
and macronutrients had been taken irregularly; no long-term laboratory
monitoring was provided due to the lack of appropriate
recommendations. On admission, she was not able to move because of
severe pain and edematous syndromes, her height decreased by 10-12 cm.
The DXA confirmed severe osteoporosis (T-score of radius total -5.6 SD,
L1-L4 -3.4 SD and total hip -4.2 SD). The X-ray demonstrated multiple
consolidated fractures of ribs. The laboratory data indicated severe
hypoproteinemia (total protein 38 g/L), hypocalcemia (ionized calcium
0.99 mmol/l), 25(OH) vitamin D deficiency (5.6 nmol/l) and an increased
rate of PTH (562,6 pg/ml). Ultrasound revealed signs of hyperplasia of
the right upper parathyroid gland (1.0 x 0.8 x 0.4 cm).
Results: Our treatment started with enhanced infusion therapy of albumin
and diuretics with the response of positive diuresis and a loss of excess
fluid. Next, the therapy aimed to replenish the deficiency of calcium
(calcium carbonate 2 g), vitamins A, D (cholecalciferol 800 IU and
alfacalcidol 2 μg), E, B, iron, folic acid, digestive enzymes and protein.
Long-term bisphosphonate therapy is prescribed after normalization of
calcium-phosphorus metabolism. Upon reexamination after the relief of
the malabsorptive syndrome and an improvement of general somatic
state. During 2 years of follow-up, the patient moved independently,
did not presented new fractures; an increase of BMD was observed (T-
score of radius total -5.1 SD, L1-L4 -2.3 SD and total hip -2.4 SD), the
laboratory test showed normalization of biochemical parameters.
Conclusion: The lack of compulsory lifelong replacement therapy and a
follow-up management leads to side effects, including severe
osteoporosis due to malabsorption related vitamin D deficiency.
Keeping all risk factors for osteoporotic fractures under control is
necessary to prevent a decrease of life quality in the extreme case of
patient's disability.
P193
SARCOPENIA AND LONG-TERM OUTCOMES IN YOUNG
ADULTS WITH JUVENILE IDIOPATHIC ARTHRITIS
M. S. Kulyk1, O. I. Ivashkivskyi2, M. B. Dzhus1
1O.O. Bohomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine,
2Communal non-commercial institution “Oleksandrivska Clinical
Hospital”, Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: Association of sarcopenia and long-term outcomes in young
adults with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) are not well studied. The
study indicates the association between articular (JADI-A) and
extraarticular (JADI-E) damages and the low lean mass in young adults
with JIA.
Methods: We studied 26 young adults with JIA, diagnosed according to
the ILAR classification, with a disease duration of >3 y, a mean age of 22.3
±8.15 y. The mean age at the disease onset was 9.04±4.9 y. We diagnosed
sarcopenia as a decrease muscle mass on DXA. We distributed patients into
two groups according to the skeletal muscle index (SMI) calculation - the
sum of muscle masses of the arms and legs/height2; the cutoff points
considered by SMI ˂7 kg/m2 for males, ˂6 kg/m2 for females. We used
the integral index of articular (JADI-A) and extraarticular (JADI-E)
damages to assess the long-term outcomes of JIA [1].
Results: All patients were divided into 2 groups according to lean mass.
The I group included 16 patients with sarcopenia (SMI–5.22±0.72 kg/
m2), II group - 10 patients without sarcopenia (SMI–8.05±0.94 kg/m2).
Although patients of both groups did not differ by age, duration and age
of disease onset, in I group were detected lower height and weight than in
the II group (height 1.6±0.07 m vs. 1.7±0.09 m; p=0.01; weight 55.06
±8.3 kg, 70.0±10.8 kg; p=0.001, respectively).The JADI‐A was higher in
the I group: 6.06±7.9 vs. 0.3±0.5; p=0.04; JADI‐E was higher in group I,
either: 1.62±1.6 vs. 0.22±0.4; p=0.02. The JADI-A score correlated with
SMI (Spearman's r [rS=-0.61]); the JADI-E score correlated with SMI
[rS=-0.49], either (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Sarcopenia was detected in young adults with JIA. The
presence of articular and extraarticular outcomes in young adults with
JIA is associated with sarcopenia.
Reference: 1. Viola S, et al. Arthritis Rheum 2005;52:2092
P194
CHARACTERIZATION OF PATIENTS WITH FRAGILITY
FRACTURE IN A CENTER OF SOUTHERN COLOMBIA
A. Pinzon Tovar1, S. Jimenez Salazar1, K. M. Tinjaca Montaño1
1Hospital Universitario de Neiva, Colombia, Neiva, Colombia
Objective: Fragility fractures associated with osteoporosis are a frequent
clinical condition, with a predilection for postmenopausal women, however
it can affect people of all ages. Its early detection and treatment is associated
with an improvement in the quality of life, as a result of a reduction in the
incidence of new fractures and prevention of the disability.
Methods: Prospective, cross-sectional, analytical, observational,
quantitative study in adult hospitalized patients with a diagnosis of fragility
fracture referred to the endocrinology service at the Hernando Moncaleano
Perdomo University Hospital, who underwent FRAX score classification
and biochemical profile to identify secondary causes of osteoporosis.
Results: Of the 31 patients included in the study, the median age of the
population was 74±13.5 years, of which only 16.3% had a previous
diagnosis of osteoporosis even though 29% had a fracture event due to
previous fragility. A 12.9% in hospital mortality was documented and an
average hospital stay of 17 days with 12.17 million Colombian pesos
cost. Hip fracture was the most frequent location with 62% of the cases.
Nonoptimal levels of vitamin D were found in 80.6%; hypoalbuminemia,
anemia, and increased BMI were associated with higher mortality during
hospital stay with a statistically significant p<0.05. Thus creating the first
database of fragility fractures in Huila and the first approach to Fracture
Liaison Service.
Conclusion: In patients with fragility fractures, it is vital to perform a
complete biochemical profile in search of secondaryism; as well as the
beginning of active therapy in order to avoid new major fracture events
that condition a negative impact on the quality of life of the patient and
their family. Comprehensive assessment by a Fracture Liaison Service
makes it easier to approach and manage these patients.
P195
LABORATORY METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE
MALPOSITION OF THE RODS OF TRANSPEDICULAR
APPARATUS OF THE SPINE IN THE INTRAOPERATIVE
PERIOD
O. V. Berdyugina1, K. A. Berdyugin1
1Ural Institute of Traumatology & Orthopaedics of V.D. Chaklin,
Ekaterinburg, Russia
S152
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: The use of transpedicular fixation in the treatment of spinal
injuries greatly contributes to the patient's recovery. Despite significant
advances in the use of instrumental correction, up to 15% of patients face
manifestations of neurological symptoms as a result of surgical treatment,
and up to 14% of patients have malposition of threaded transpedicular
rods and screws. The aim of the study was to determine laboratory criteria
for assessing the incorrect position of the rods in the intraoperative period
during transpedicular fixation of spine.
Methods: The studies were carried out in a group of 110 patients with
fractures of the lumbar spine (localization: level L1). The indications for
surgical treatment were: wedge-shaped deformity of the vertebra more
than 1/3, local kyphotic deformity of the spine, the presence of vertebro-
medullary conflict of the 2nd degree. Malposition of threaded rods was
found in 10% of cases. In ½ cases (that is, in 5%), the complication was
detected no later than 10 days after the operation. The complication was
accompanied by the standing of the structural elements into the lumen of
the spinal canal. All patients underwent clinical and X-ray examination,
computed tomography. A small volume of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was
taken from all patients in the intraoperative period, after installing the
rods, to determine general clinical parameters (cytosis, leukogram, etc.),
biochemical parameters (total protein, chlorides, etc.), immunological
parameters (acute phase proteins, interleukins).
Results: It was found that among all the studied laboratory parameters,
the concentration of the acute phase protein, haptoglobin, was the most
important. At a level of haptoglobin in the cerebrospinal fluid of 0.1 g/l
and higher, the malposition of the rods was detected, at a concentration of
less than 0.1 g/l, there was no malposition. The method allows obtaining
reliable information about the presence of complications of surgical
treatment at the stage when it is possible to correct the position of metal
structures, that is, it aims to prevent the formation of a possible
complication.
Conclusion: The resulting research laboratory test is accurate; it allows
you to properly differentiate between not less than 82% of cases.
P196
LABORATORY CRITERION FOR DETERMINING THE
M A L P O S I T I O N O F R O D S I N P A T I E N T S W I T H
TRANSPEDICULAR FIXATION OF THE SPINE IN
OSTEOPOROSIS
O. V. Berdyugina1, K. A. Berdyugin1
1Ural Institute of Traumatology & Orthopaedics of V.D. Chaklin,
Ekaterinburg, Russia
Objective: It is known that the presence of vertebral osteoporosis
complicates the treatment of patients with spinal injuries, in particular,
when using the method of transpedicular fixation. Changes in the
structure of bone tissue often lead to malposition of threaded
transpedicular rods, which can appear both in the early postoperative
period and in the long term after the start of treatment. The aim of this
work was to develop a laboratory criterion for assessing the risk of
incorrect position of the rods in patients with transpedicular fixation of
the spine in osteoporosis.
Methods: Studies were carried out in a group of 110 patients with a
fracture of the lumbar spine. Malposition of threaded rods was detected
in 5% of cases. In patients with suspected malposition, 0.5 ml of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was taken to determine the concentration of
ceruloplasmin. The study was performed on a Ciba Corning Express
Plus biochemical analyzer (Diagnostics, Germany).
Results: It was found that the concentration of ceruloplasmin determined
in the cerebrospinal fluid obtained at the time of the operation, as well as
in the postoperative period, may reflect the risk of malposition of threaded
transpedicular rods in osteoporosis of the vertebrae. Obtaining CSF in a
patient with undiagnosed vertebral osteoporosis with suspected
malposition transpedicular rod at any stage of postoperative follow-up,
as well as in a patient with a known diagnosis of "vertebral osteoporosis"
at any stage of postoperative follow-up or at least 2-3 months after
applying an external fixation device during a control examination with
the determination of ceruloplasmin concentration in the CSF, allows us to
conclude that there is a high risk of having a malposition at a protein level
of <0.2 g/l, and at a concentration of 0.2 g/l and above – about the absence
of a malposition. The duration of ceruloplasmin determination on an
automatic biochemical analyzer is 10 min, thus, the determination method
is simple to perform and allows you to quickly obtain the necessary
information about the complication.
Conclusion: The developed method for determining the risk of developing
an incorrect position of the rods in patients with transpedicular fixation of
the spine in osteoporosis makes it possible to determine with high accuracy
the presence of a complication of surgical treatment.
P197
EXAMINATION OF THE HEMOSINOVIAL FLUID TO
DETERMINE HOW LONG AGO THE INJURY THAT
CAUSED POST-TRAUMATIC HEMARTHROSIS WAS
RECEIVED
O. V. Berdyugina1, K. A. Berdyugin1
1Ural Institute of Traumatology & Orthopaedics of V.D. Chaklin,
Ekaterinburg, Russia
Objective: The nature of the course of post-traumatic hemarthrosis, the
risk of complications and the outcome of treatment depend on how long
ago the injury that caused the pathological process occurred. Obviously,
you can find out about when the injury occurred from the patient. There
are situations in which it is not possible to find out the information (the
patient does not remember or was not conscious). Meanwhile,
information about how long ago the injury occurred is important, it is
taken into account when making a diagnosis and influences the choice of
an adequate method of treatment. This study aimed to develop a
laboratory criterion to determine how long ago the injury that caused
the hemarthrosis occurred.
Methods: We examined 25 patients with a diagnosis of post-traumatic
hemarthrosis of the knee joint. The diagnosis was made on the basis of a
combination of clinical, instrumental and laboratory research methods.
All patients underwent knee puncture to reduce fluid pressure and relieve
pain. The resulting biological fluid was examined by general clinical,
biochemical, and immunological methods. The research results were
processed statistically using the Statistica v.10.0.228.2 software (Stat
Soft, USA).
Results: Despite the ambiguous changes associated with the response to
inflammation, the most specific marker of erythrocyte hemolysis is the
haptoglobin protein. It serves to bind free hemoglobin formed during the
destruction of red blood cells in the bloodstream. In patients with post-
traumatic hemarthrosis caused by trauma 1-3 days before going to the
doctor ("fresh" hemarthrosis), the concentration of haptoglobin in the
aspirate was 1.66 g/l or more, if the patient had post-traumatic
hemarthrosis as a result of trauma, received 4 or more days before going
to the clinic ("stale" hemarthrosis), the concentration of haptoglobin in the
aspirate was <1.66 g/l.
Conclusion: Determination of the time from the moment of injury that
caused post-traumatic hemarthrosis can be carried out using a laboratory
indicator, assessed in the hemosynovial fluid from the damaged joint.
P198
A S S O C I A T I O N B E T W E E N E X P O S U R E T O FINE
PARTICULATE MATTER AND OSTEOPOROSIS: A
POPULATION-BASED COHORT STUDY
G. Adami1, G. Cattani2, A. Fassio1, O. Viapiana1, P. Olivi3, G. Orsolini1,
E. Bertoldo1, E. Fracassi1, D. Gatti1, M. Rossini1
S153
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Rheumatology Unit, University of Verona, Verona, 2Italian Institute for
Environmental Protection & Research, Rome, 3Orthopedic Unit,
University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Objective: Environmental air pollution has been associated with
disruption of bone health at a molecular level. Particulate matter (PM)
exposure can simultaneously stimulate bone resorption and halt bone
formation. The primary aim of the present study is to describe the
association between long-term exposure to PM and osteoporosis in a
large cohort of women at high risk of fracture.
Methods: Clinical, demographic and densitometric data were extracted
from the DeFRAcalc79 dataset, which gathers data on women at risk for
osteoporosis. Data on the monitoring of PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations
were retrieved from the Italian institute of environment protection and
research (Instituto Superiore per la Protezione e la Ricerca Ambientale,
ISPRA). Generalized linear models with robust estimators were
employed to determine the relationship between BMD and PM long-
term exposure.
Results: 59,950 women from 110 Italian provinces were included in the
study. PM 2,5 exposure was negatively associated with T-score levels at
the femoral neck (β -0.005, 95%CI 0.007 to -0.003) and lumbar spine (β -
0.003, 95%CI -0.006 to -0.001). Chronic exposure to PM2.5 above 25
μg/m³ was associated with a 16% higher risk of having osteoporotic T-
score at any site (aOR 1.161, 95%CI 1.105 to 1.220), exposure to PM10
above 30 μg/m³ was associated with a 15% higher risk of having
osteoporotic T-score at any site (aOR 1.148, 95%CI 1.098 to 1.200)
(Figure).
Conclusion: Long-term exposure to air pollution was associated with a
higher risk of osteoporosis. Femoral neck site seemed to be more
susceptible to the detrimental effect of PM exposure than lumbar spine
site.
Figure. Risk of osteoporosis at any site in patients chronically exposed to
particulate matter (PM) 10 >30 μg/m3 and PM2.5 >25 μg/m3. Model 3
(main model) adjusted for age, BMI, presence of prevalent fragility
fractures, family history of osteoporosis, menopause, glucocorticoid
treatment, comorbidities and macro-area of residency (categorized as:
northern Italy, central Italy and southern Italy).
P199
THE USE OF ORAL AMINO-BISPHOSPHONATES AND THE
RISK OF COVID-19
G. Adami1, M. Rossini1, V. Perrone2, D. Sangiorgi2, M. Andretta3, F.
Bartolini4, A. Cavaliere5, A. Ciaccia6, S. Dell'Orco7, S. Grego8, S.
Salzano9, L. Ubertazzo9, A. Vercellone10, D. Gatti1, A. Fassio1, O.
Viapiana1, L. Degli Esposti2
1Rheumatology Unit, University of Verona, Verona, 2CliCon S.r.l.
Health, Economics & Outcomes Research, Bologna, 3UOC Assistenza
Farmaceutica Territoriale Azienda ULSS 8 Berica, Vicenza,
4Dipartimento Farmaceutico, USL Umbria 2, Perugia, 5UOC Farmacia
Aziendale, ASL Viterbo, Viterbo, 6Dipartimento Farmaceutico, ASL
Foggia, Foggia, 7UOC Farmaceutica Territoriale, ASL Roma 6, Roma,
8Dipartimento Tecnico-Amministrativo, ASL 3 Genovese, Genova,
9UOC Farmacia Territoriale, ASL Roma 4, Roma, 10Dipartimento
Farmaceutico, ASL Napoli 3 Sud, Napoli, Italy
Objective: The determinants of the susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2
infection and severe coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) manifestations
are yet not fully understood. Amino-bisphosphonates (N-BPs) have anti-
inflammatory properties and have been shown to reduce the incidence of
lower respiratory infections, cardiovascular events and cancer. We
conducted a population-based retrospective observational case-control
study with the primary objective of determining if oral N-BPs treatment
can play a role in the susceptibility to the development of severe COVID-
19.
Methods: Administrative ICD-9-CM and ATC data, representative of
Italian population (9% sample of the overall population), were analyzed.
Oral N-BPs (mainly alendronate and risedronate) were included in the
analysis. Patients treated with bisphosphonates (cases) were randomly
matched (1:1 ratio) for age, sex and for other clinically relevant variables
(presence of treatments other than bisphosphonates and hospitalizations)
with all the health assisted population without this treatment (controls).
Results: Incidence of COVID-19 hospitalization was 12.32 [95%CI
9.61-15.04] and 11.55 [95%CI 8.91-14.20], of ICU utilization due to
COVID-19 was 1.25 [95%CI 0.38-2.11] and 1.42 [95%CI 0.49-2.36]
and of all-cause death was 4.06 [95%CI 2.50-5.61] and 3.96 [95%CI
2.41-5.51] for oral N-BPs users and non-users, respectively (Figure 1).
Sensitivity analyses that excluded patients with prevalent vertebral or hip
fragility fractures and without concomitant glucocorticoid treatment
yielded similar results (Figures 2, 3).
Conclusion: We found that the incidence of COVID-19 hospitalization,
intensive care unit (ICU) utilization and COVID-19 potentially related
mortality were similar in N-BPs treated and nontreated subjects. Similar
results were found in N-BPs vs. other antiosteoporotic drugs. We
provided real-life data on the safety of oral N-BPs in terms of severe
COVID-19 risk on a population-based cohort. Our results strongly
support national and international guidelines that advocate against the
discontinuation of oral bisphosphonates only for the fear of COVID-19.
Figure 1. Incidence and 95%CI of COVID-19 related events in N-BPs
treated and untreated subjects.
Figure 2. Incidence and 95%CI of COVID-19 related events in N-BPs
treated and untreated subjects with antiosteoporotic drugs and without
corticosteroids.
S154
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure 3. Incidence and 95%CI of COVID-19 related events in N-BPs
treated and untreated without previous vertebral or hip fragility fractures.
Figure 4. Incidence of COVID-19 related events in bisphosphonates
treated and untreated patients without previous vertebral or hip fracture
without corticosteroid prescriptions.
P200
P R O B L E M S
O F
C L I N I C A L
D I A G N O S I S
O F
DEVELOPMENTAL DYSPLASIA OF THE HIP IN INFANTS
V. Zinchenko1, M. Kabatsy1, I. Hertsen1
1State Institution “Institute of Traumatology & Orthopedics National
Academy of Medical Science of Ukraine”, Dept. of Joint Diseases in
Children & Adolescents, Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: To determine the reliability and feasibility of using the system
of selective ultrasound screening of children in groups at risk of DDH.
Methods: The hip joints were examined in 1549 children (600 boys and
949 girls) ranging from 5 days to 12 months of age. All children were
divided into two groups, identified by clinical signs and risk factors DDH.
The children underwent ultrasound examination of the hip joints
according to R. Graf. Based on this final diagnosis, sensitivity, specificity,
positive and negative predictive values of risk factors and physical
examination findings were calculated.
Results: The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and
negative predictive values of having a risk factor for DDH in history were
63%, 76%, 48%, 86%, and having abnormal hip examination findings
were 37%, 91%, 58% and 81%, respectively.
Conclusion: The expediency of the system of general ultrasound
screening of the infants hip has been substantiated, given that when using
the system of selective screening of risk groups, 12% (every eighth child)
of DDH in children remains undiagnosed.
P201
LOW BIOAVAILABLE IGF-1 IS ASSOCIATED WITH
SARCOPENIA IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
M. Krikelis1, D. Moschou1, K. Makris2, S. Tournis3, C. P. Mavragani4, E.
Mole1, E. Chronopoulos5, I. Donta3, S. Gazi1
1KAT General Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., 2KAT General Hospital,
Clinical Biochemistry Dept., 3National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, School of Medicine, KAT General Hospital, Laboratory for
Research of the Musculoskeletal System “Theodoros Garofalidis”,
4National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Medicine,
Dept. of Physiology, 5National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
School of Medicine, Konstantopoulio General Hospital, Second Dept. of
Orthopaedics, Attica, Greece
Objective: To measure serum levels of bioavailable IGF-1 in
postmenopausal women with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and to examine
their association with sarcopenia.
Methods: The study group consisted of 69 postmenopausal women with
RA and 28 postmenopausal women as controls. Serum levels of
bioavailable IGF-1 was determined using an electrochemiluminescent
assay. Sarcopenia was defined according to EWGSOP recommendations
as low muscle mass (expressed as appendicular skeletal muscle mass
index [ASMI] calculated by DXA) and low muscle strength (hand grip)
or low physical performance (short physical performance battery
[SPPB]).
Results: Mean IGF-1 levels were significantly lower in the RA group as
compared with controls (102.3±42.2 μg/L vs. 121.3±34.9 μg/L,
p=0.038). In addition, the prevalence of sarcopenia was significantly
higher in patients with RA (42% vs. 0%, p=0.001). Moreover, RA
patients with sarcopenia had lower IGF-1 levels compared to those
without sarcopenia (90.15±37.2 μg/L vs. 111.08±43.8 μg/L, p=0.036).
Conclusion: Postmenopausal women with RA have lower levels of
bioavailable serum IGF-1 and higher prevalence of sarcopenia as
compared with controls. Lower levels of IGF-1 are associated with the
presence of sarcopenia in postmenopausal women with RA. Thus, low
levels of bioavailable serum IGF-1 may serve as a predictive factor of
developing sarcopenia in postmenopausal women with RA.
Acknowledgements: Supported by grants from the Greek Rheumatology
Society and Professional Association of Rheumatologists.
P202
HIGH BONE TURNOVER IS ASSOCIATED WITH DISEASE
ACTIVITY IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS AND IS NOT ASSOCIATED
WITH DISEASE CHRONICITY OR SARCOPENIA
D. Moschou1, M. Krikelis1, K. Makris2, E. Mole1, G. Baili1, E.
Chronopoulos3, S. Tournis4, C. P. Mavragani5, I. Donta4, S. Gazi1
1KAT General Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., 2KAT General Hospital,
Clinical Biochemistry Dept., 3National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, School of Medicine, Kontsantopoulio General Hospital, Second
Dept. of Orthopaedics, 4National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
School of Medicine, Laboratory for Research of the Musculoskeletal
System “Theodoros Garofalidis”, KAT General Hospital, 5National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Medicine, Dept. of
Physiology, Attica, Greece
Objective: To measure serum levels of bone turnover markers in
postmenopausal women with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and to examine
their association with disease activity, disease chronicity and sarcopenia.
Methods: The study group consisted of 69 postmenopausal women with
RA and 28 postmenopausal women as controls. Serum levels of bone
alkaline phosphatase (BALP), serum crosslinked C-telopeptide of type I
collagen (CTX), osteocalcin (OCN), PTH, and 25-hydroxycalciferol
S155
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
(25-OH-D3) were determined. The ratio CTX/OCN was calculated as
indicative of bone turnover levels. RA disease activity was calculated
using the DAS28 (ESR) score and RA chronicity was calculated using
the HAQ score. Sarcopenia was defined according to the EWGSOP
recommendations.
Results: The mean values for bone formation markers OCN and BALP
were significantly lower in the RA group (OCN: 16.6±9.3 ng/ml vs. 20.3
±6.7 ng/ml, p=0.05 and BALP: 11.9±4.8 IU/dl vs. 19.5±6.18 IU/dl,
p=0.001). The mean values for bone resorption markers CTX and PTH
were increased in the RA group (CTX: 0.273±0.176 ng/ml vs. 0.243
±0.114 ng/ml, p=0.402 and PTH: 53.29±22.4 pg/ml vs. 38.8±15.8 pg/
ml, p=0.004). The mean value of 25 OH cholecalciferol did not differ
between the two groups (29.6±10.1 vs. 25.3±11.4, p=0.071). The ratio
CTX/OCN, indicative of high bone turnover levels, was significantly
increased in RA patients (0.182±0.009 vs. 0.013±0.007, p=0.007). The
high bone turnover in the RA group was independent of disease
chronicity (p=0.173) or sarcopenia (p=0.645) and was positively
associated with disease activity (p=0.05). Higher disease activity was
associated with increased bone turnover (Spearman value: 0.233).
Conclusion: Increased bone resorption accompanied with decreased
bone formation is associated with high bone turnover in post-
menopausal women with RA. Increased disease activity results to high
bone turnover and the latter is not associated with disease chronicity or
sarcopenia.
P203
CHARACTERISATION OF GROWTH PLATE DYNAMICS IN
SURGICAL AND NONINVASIVE LOADED MURINE MODELS
OF OSTEOARTHRITIS
H. J. Samvelyan1, K. Madi2, A. E. Törnqvist3, B. Javaheri4, K. A.
Staines1
1University of Brighton, Brighton, UK, 23Dmagination Ltd, Didcot, UK,
3University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 4City University of
London, London, UK
Objective: Our recent work in the MRC National Survey of Health and
Development (NSHD) found that increased height in childhood was
associated, albeit modestly, with lower odds of knee OA at age 53 years.
We build upon this work to examine growth plate dynamics in surgical
and noninvasive loaded mouse models of osteoarthritis (OA).
Methods: Eight 8-week-old C57BL/6 male mice underwent
destabilisation of medial meniscus (DMM) surgery to induce OA-like
changes in right knee joints. Contralateral left knee joints had no
intervention (controls). In 16-week-old C57BL/6 male mice (n=6), OA
was induced using non-invasive mechanical loading of right knee joints
with peak force of 11 N. Nonloaded left knee joints were internal controls.
Chondrocyte transiency in articular cartilage (AC) and growth plate (GP)
of tibiae was examined by histology and immunohistochemistry. Tibial
subchondral bone (SCB) parameters were measured using μCT and
correlated to 3D GP bridging analysis.
Results: Higher expression of chondrocyte hypertrophy markers;
Col10a1 and MMP13 were observed in tibial AC chondrocytes of
DMM and loaded knees. In tibial GP, Col10a1 and MMP13 expressions
were widely dispersed in significantly enlarged zones of proliferative and
hypertrophic chondrocytes in DMM (p=0.002 and p<0.0001,
respectively) and loaded (both p<0.0001) tibiae of mice compared to their
controls. 3D quantification revealed enriched GP bridging and higher
bridge densities in medial compared to lateral tibiae of DMM and loaded
knee joints of the mice. GP dynamics were associated with higher SCB
volume fraction in medial compared to lateral tibiae of DMM and loaded
knee joints (DMM SCB BV/TV: 36.7±4.5% vs. 29.4±3.1%, p=0.03;
loaded: 47.1±1.6% vs. 40.1±1.7%, p=0.02 respectively) and epiphyseal
trabecular BV/TV in medial tibiae of loaded knee joints (73.4±2.8% vs.
60.7±1.8%, p=0.005).
Conclusion: The results confirm associations between aberrant
chondrocyte hypertrophy marker expression and OA pathology in
surgical and loaded murine models of OA. Herein, we reveal for the first
time spatial variation of growth plate bridging in surgical and loaded
osteoarthritis models and how these may contribute to anatomical
variation in vulnerability of osteoarthritis development.
Disclosure: The research leading to these results has received technical
support from 3Dmagination Ltd, Didcot, UK.
P204
OSTEOPOROSIS CLINICAL RISK FACTORS THAT
JUSTIFIED THE PRESCRIPTION OF BONE DENSITOMETRY
(DXA): ABOUT 444 PATIENTS
K. Nassar1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., Hassan II
University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Osteoporosis is a disease that affects BMD and bone
microarchitecture at the origin of an increased risk of fracture. The
reduction in bone density assessed DXA and fall history represent the
first two risk factors of nonvertebral fracture after menopause. There is a
several risk factors of densitometric osteoporosis. The study aim was
evaluation of clinical risk factors that justified the realization of BMD
by DXA about 444 cases.
Methods: Transversal and descriptive monocentric cohort study
conducted for 24 months in 444 patients referred by physicians regularly
use prescription of BMD by DXA. The realization of this exploration by
the same DXA-Hologic in the rheumatology department at the University
Hospital Ibn Rochd was the criterion for entry into the study. All patients
were interviewed on the same day on the risk factors for osteoporosis and
fractures justifying the prescription of a BMD.
Results: Data included 410 women and 34 men. Most women were
postmenopausal (90.2%). The average age was 59.3 y (σ=12.6), 34%
were ≥65 y. The mean BMI was at 27.6. 18.3% of patients had at least
a history of falls in the previous 12 months and 22.5% a history of fracture
after a low-energy trauma. 42.6% were osteoporotic and 36.7% had
osteopenia in at least one of these sites: lumbar spine, femoral neck, total
hip. Early menopause, taking corticosteroids in the long term, rheumatoid
arthritis and diabetes were the main risk factors that justified the
prescription of DXA for the evaluation of bone densitometry (Table).
Prescribers of this exploration were mainly rheumatologists (N=256,
57.1%), 41 endocrinologists (9.2%).
Conclusion: Our results confirm those of the literature regarding the risk
factors that justified the prescription of BMD by DXA. These factors
occurs diagnosis of osteoporosis in our study in 42.6% of patients.
Table. Patients characteristics and risk factors justified DXA
Patients characteristics and
osteoporosis risk factors
Patients number=444
n (%)
Women
410 (92.3’)
Menopausic women
370 (90.2)
Mean age (σ)
59.3 (12.6)
< 65 y
293 (66.0)
≥65 y
151 (34.0)
BMI (kg/m2)
mean (σ)
27.6 (5.1)
skinny (<19)
9 (2.0)
normal (19-25)
135 (30.4)
overweight (≥25)
300 (67.6)
Osteoporosis risk factors
Early menopause
77 (18.8)
S156
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Rheumatoid arthritis
54 (12.2)
Diabetes
62 (14.0)
Hyperthyroidism
46 (10.4)
Long term corticosteroid
76 (17.1)
Past history of smoking
12 (2.7)
Alcohol intake
11 (2.5)
P205
BONE STATUS AND TRANSVERSE MYELITIS
I. A. Voinea1, I. C. Raducu1, A. Draghici1, E. Petrova2, A. Dumitrascu1,
G. Voicu1, N. Dumitru2, A. Ghemigian2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Bone loss might be expected in patients with spinal cord
dysfunction including those patients associating transverse myelitis
(TM) (1-5). Skeletal fragility may be related to immobilization, vitamin
D deficiency, etc. (1-5). We aim to introduce a female with anomalies of
bone status associating TM.
Case report: A 54-year old, nonsmoking female is admitted for 5-y
history of thoracic TM with motor deficit of paralytic intensity on both
lower limbs. She is also known with untreated postmenopausal
osteoporosis. The medical history also includes neurogenic bladder,
ponytail syndrome, micronodular endemic goiter with euthyroidism and
vitamin D deficiency with persistent supplementation. On admission,
total serum calcium=9.5 mg/dL (normal: 8.4-10.2 mg/dL), bone turnover
markers: alkaline phosphatase=75 U/L (normal: 40-150U/L),
CrossLaps=0.379 ng/mL (normal: 0.33-0.782 ng/mL), osteocalcin=20.30
ng/mL (normal: 15-46 ng/mL), P1NP=67.6 ng/mL (normal: 15-46 ng/
mL), normal PTH=31.55 pg/mL (normal: 15-65 pg/mL), low
25OHD=15.8 ng/mL (normal >30 ng/mL). The central DXA showed
lumbar BMD=0.905 g/cm2, T-score=-2.3 SD, Z-score=-1.1 SD, hip
BMD=0.483 g/cm2, T-score=-4.2 SD, Z-score=-3.1 SD. Profile screening
X-Ray of thoracic-lumbar spine showed no vertebral fractures. Treatment
with zolendronic acid 5 mg/y plus vitamin D 2000 UI/d was initiated. One
year later, 25OHD increased to 24.3 ng/mL, while DXA assays showed
an improvement of parameters as following: lumbar BMD=0.925 g/cm2,
T-score=-2.1 SD, Z-score=-0.9 SD, hip BMD=0.546 g/cm2, T-score=-3.7
SD, Z-score=-2.7 SD.
Conclusion: In patients with TM, bone status mat be damaged due to
multiple mechanisms and antiosteoporotic drugs in addition to vitamin D
supplements might help the prevention of fracture and sarcopenia in order
to pay attention to quality of life.
References:
1.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
2.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2438.
3.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
4.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:36837.
5.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
P206
SECONDARY DETERMINATIONS AT BONE LEVEL AS FIRST
MANIFESTATION OF BREAST CANCER
E. D. Becheru1, A. Draghici1, C. M. Alexandru1, A. Dumitrascu1, G.
Voicu1, A. Goldstein1, N. Dumitru2, E. Petrova2, A. Ghemigian2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Breast cancer is the most frequent diagnosed carcinoma in
women (1-5). Skeleton is among the most common sites of secondary
spreading, as well as lung, liver, brain, and lymph nodes (1-5). Prompt
recognition of metastases involves a prompt therapy with prolonged
survival time and increase quality of life (1-5). We aim to introduce a
female case associating bone metastasis as first manifestation of
mammary carcinoma.
Case report: A 44-year-old female known with total hysterectomy and
bilateral adnexectomy for a benign uterine tumour at age of 40 y is
admitted for generalized bone pain, especially at lower left limb, left
shoulder and generalized muscular pain, fatigue. Biochemistry panel of
phoshor-calcium metabolism was normal, as well as BMD at DXA.
Technetium 99m whole body bone scintigraphy showed abnormal uptake
at skull (frontal and parietal bones), vertebral spine, femur, humerus.
Tumoral markers CA125 and CA15-3 were mildly elevated, as well as bone
turnover markers. Computed tomography scan showed a large lump at
the level of left breast and multiple other smaller lesions in both mammary
regions, characteristic for a multicentric and multifocal carcinoma, with
mediastinal lymph nodes enlargement in addition to secondary bone
spreading at the level of cervical and thoracic vertebras, femur, lumbar
region and both clavicles. Zolendronic acid was initiated in association
with multilevel oncologic therapy.
Conclusion: Bone metastases on females without a history of a
carcinoma might represent the first sign of the disease and adequate
recognition may improve the outcome.
References:
1.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
2.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2438.
3.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
4.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
5.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
P207
SKELETON METASTASES AS FIRST SIGN OF AGGRESSIVE
PAPILLARY THYROID CARCINOMA
E. D. Becheru1, I. A. Voinea1, C. M. Alexandru1, A. Dumitrascu1, A.
Goldstein1, N. Dumitru2, A. Ghemigian2, E. Petrova2, M. Ghemigian1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), a common endocrine
neoplasia has a slow evolution, mostly associating a favourable prognosis
(1-5) .Thyroidectomy is the first line therapy; postoperative hypocalcemia
requires calcium and vitamin D (1-5). PTC first invades cervical lymph
nodes (1-5). Distant spreading(lung, bones) in the absence of obvious
thyroid disease is very uncommon(occult evolution).
Case report: This is a 55-year-old male admitted for lumbar pain
emerging to lower limbs, poorly responsive to analgesics. Clinical
evaluation was irrelevant. MRI revealed a tumour at S1 sacral vertebra
of 46/36/27 mm, with compression of the spinal nerve and local oedema.
S1-L5 laminectomy was performed; postoperative pathologic and
immunochemistry exam pointed PTC metastases. Further, computed
tomography was done and a few thyroid nodules were identified, the
largest of 16 mm with microcalcifications, and cervical lymph nodes of
maximum 19/18 mm. Total thyroidectomy with central
lymphadenectomy was done with post-operative PTC confirmation.
Within less than a year, while under monthly zolendronic acid, the patient
also received radioiodine therapy (450 mCi), with progressive evolution
of the disease, reaching a peak of blood thyroglobulin level of 12586 ng/
mL. Whole body iodine 131 scintigraphy showed spreading to both
lungs, left shoulder, sacrum, and vertebral spine. He further started a
therapy with thyrosine kinase inhibitor.
S157
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: It is very unlikely that PTC’s first sign to be bone metastasis.
It is important to identify the condition, for a proper diagnosis and therapy
to improve the outcome. This case was an exceptional form of aggressive
PTC poorly responsive to traditional treatment.
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:187.
2.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
3.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
4.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
5.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
P208
HYPERCALCEMIA AS FIRST MANIFESTATION OF LUNG
CANCER
A. Draghici1, E. D. Becheru1, I. C. Raducu1, A. Dumitrascu1, A.
Goldstein1, N. Dumitru2, A. Ghemigian2, E. Petrova2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Hypercalcemia associating lung and mediastinal carcinomas
represents a marker of poor prognostic marker (1-5). Low PTH is
suggestive for paraneoplasic syndrome (1-5).
Case report: This is a 54-year-old, nonsmoking male, known with
arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and high levels of total
serum calcium (TSC)=13.4 mg/dL (normal:8.5-10.2 mg/dL) without
any investigations and therapy. He was admitted for constipation, nausea
and abdominal pain in relationship to high TSC. Thyroid function was
normal, TSC was persistently high=13.2 mg/dL (normal: 8.5-10.2 mg/
dL), suppressed PTH=6.7 pg/mL (normal: 15-64pg/mL), 25OHD=22.7
ng/mL (normal >30 ng/mL), increased CrossLaps=1.35 ng/mL (normal:
0.104-0.504 ng/mL) and osteocalcin=82 ng/mL (normal:14-46 ng/mL).
Lumbar BMD-DXA=0.892 g/cm2, T-score=-2.7 SD, Z-score=-1.9 SD.
Computed tomography: inhomogeneous mediastinal and lung tumor
enclosing the left primitive bronchus, left inferior pulmonary vein of
42/65/55 mm, left pulmonary atelectasis and cloned fluid accumulation
in the right pleural cavity; mediastinal lymphadenopathy of 7/12 mm.
High tumor markers: CA125=47.8 U/mL (normal <35), CA15-3=25.4
U/mL(normal <25 U/mL). Whole body bone scintigraphy (99mTc-HDP)
revealed increased tracer uptake at bilateral hip, mostly at femoral head
and humeral proximal epiphyses. The patient was offered pamidronate 15
mg/mL by intravenous infusion, and after 2 weeks biochemistry showed
normal values of TSC=9.9 mg/dL (normal: 8.4-10.2 mg/dL) and
PTH=7.3 pg/mL (normal: 15-65 pg/mL). However, muscle weakness,
fatigue, nausea persistent, and after initial biochemical control of
hypercalcemia, high TSC relapsed. In the meantime, the patient was
referred for further oncological investigations and therapy which he
delayed. He died within a few months.
Conclusion: Malignancy related hypercalcemia represents an
independent factor of poor prognostic. Some cases present the high
TSC levels in the absence of specific diagnostic of originating neoplasia.
Specialists from different areas of medicine should pay attention to high
levels of calcium unrelated to drugs or dehydration. Low PTH levels in
addition to high calcium are very suggestive for cancer associated
hypercalcemia.
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:187.
2.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
3.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
4.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
5.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
P209
VERY LOW BONE MASS AND ANKYLOSING SPONDYLITIS
I. A. Voinea1, E. D. Becheru1, A. Draghici1, G. Voicu1, R. Capota1, N.
Dumitru2, A. Ghemigian2, E. Petrova2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I.Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Several rheumatic diseases, for instance ankylosing
spondylitis (AS), are characterized by extremely low bone mass,
including in males or young adults (1-5). In patients with very low T-
score, high risk of vertebral fractures, lack of response to antiresorptive
therapy, or gastric morbidities, anabolic drugs like teriparatide are an
option in countries with available protocol (1-5).
Case report: A 66-year-old, smoking male is admitted for bone
assessment. His personal history includes: 2 years ago he suffered a left
hip fracture and, despite the diagnosis of severe osteoporosis, he was not
compliant to specific therapy. He is known for HLA-B27-positive AS since
the age of 35 y. The medical history includes: congenital dysphonia,
polyneuropathy, atrial fibrillation, chronic heart failure, right fascicular
block; also, chronic gastroduodenitis, megacolon, gallstones, microlithiasis.
On admission, biochemistry profile showed: total serum calcium=9.8 mg/
dL (normal: 8.5-10.2 mg/dL), phosphorus=3.2 mg/dL (normal: 2.5-4.5 mg/
dL), bone turnover markers: alkaline phosphatase=85 U/L (normal: 38-129
U/L), high CrossLaps=0.892 ng/mL (normal: 0.104-0.504 ng/mL),
osteocalcin=20.60 ng/mL (normal: 14-46 ng/mL), and increased
P1NP=88.25 ng/mL (normal: 15-46 pg/mL), and bone hormones as
following: PTH=31.96 pg/mL (normal: 15-65 pg/mL), 25OHD=20.4 ng/
mL (normal >30 ng/mL). Central DXA showed lumbar L2-4 BMD=0.905
g/cm2, T-score=-6.6 SD, Z-score=-5.5 SD, hip BMD=0.581 g/cm2, T-
score=-3.6 SD, Z-score=-2.7 SD, 1/3 distal radius BMD=0.580 g/cm2, T-
score=-2.8 SD, Z-score=-2.2 SD. Screening spine X-ray revealed kyphosis-
maximum point: T8 vertebra, mild (T5,T10,T11), moderate (T6) and
severe (T7,T8,T9,T12) vertebral fractures. Treatment with zolendronic acid
5 mg/y plus vitamin D 2000 UI/d was initiated. One year later, 25OHD was
23.50 ng/mL; improvement of DXA profile: L2-4 BMD=0.554 g/cm2, T-
score=-5.6 SD, Z-score=-4.9 SD, hip BMD=0.624 g/cm2, T-score=-3.4SD,
Z-score=-2.2 SD, 1/3radius BMD=0.592 g/cm2, T-score=-2.7 SD. Z-
score=-2 SD. Further therapy with zolendronic acid and vitamin D
supplements were recommended.
Conclusion: AS-related qualitative and quantitative impact on bone
requires lifelong follow-up, as well as therapy.
References:
1.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
2.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
3.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
4.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;70:3176.
5.
Radu L, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3483.
P210
FROM HYPERCALCEMIA TO... OVARIAN CANCER
A. Draghici1, E. Petrova2, I. A. Voinea1, I. C. Raducu1, G. Voicu1, R.
Capota1, N. Dumitru2, A. Dumitrascu1, A. Ghemigian2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, 2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
S158
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Ovarian tumors represent a vast, challenging,
multidisciplinary field, with a particular poor outcome for ovarian cancer
(OC) (1-5). Malignancy-related hypercalcemia is a marker of severe
prognostic (1-5). We aim to introduce a case detected with OC starting
from hypercalcemia-related syndrome.
Case report: A 75-year-old female, known with arterial hypertension,
type 2 diabetes mellitus, is admitted for fatigue, nausea, lower abdominal
distension, 9-kg weight loss/last year. Clinical exam: pelvic mass and
ascites. Blood assays: total serum calcium=11.1 mg/dL (normal:8.5-10
mg/dL) (she denies vitamin D/A/calcium supplements); normal TSH;
PTH=84.9 pg/mL (normal: 15-65 pg/mL); 25OHD=10 ng/mL (normal
>30 ng/mL); normal bone turnover markers. Osteoporosis confirmed by:
L2-4BMD-DXA=0.839 g/cm2, T-score=-3 SD, Z-score=-1.1 SD.
Computer tomography: left ovarian tumor(14/10.5 cm), peritoneal
carcinomatosis, hepatic and pulmonary metastases, subchondral cysts in
left acetabulum(1.7/1.3 cm), and areas of osteocondensation of L2 (0.4
cm), left iliac bone (0.5 cm), right iliac bone (0.55 cm). CA125=5439
U/mL(normal: 0.1-35). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) based on cell block
ascitic fluid: positive WT1, ER=40%, PGR negative, Ki67=45% (high
grade serous adenocarcinoma). Vitamin D was added to adjuvant dose-
dense carboplatin and paclitaxel chemotherapy (6 cycles) followed by
debulking surgery (hysterectomy+salpingo-oophorectomy+
omentectomy+local lymphadenectomy), then another 6 cycles.
Postoperative histological and IHC profile confirmed the block cell
profiling. BRCA1+2 tests were negative so she became candidate to
olaparib, a poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase inhibitor. After another month
of therapy, 18F-FDG positron emission tomography/computed
tomography (PET/CT) showed no metabolic active lesions in pelvic area,
neither thyroid gland, mammary gland, pulmonary, in liver, adrenals or
bones. Also, the value of CA125 normalized (=10 U/mL), so was total
serum calcium (=9.8 mg/dL). Conclusion: Nowadays, prompt
recognition of a malignancy might embrace a clear beneficial of the
outcome even in severe cases like OC. Hypercalcemia may be related
to bone metastases or paraneoplasic PTHrP production.
References:
1.
Gheorghisan-Galateanu AA, et al. Acta Endocrinologica- Bucharest
2017;3:356.
2.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
3.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
4.
Poiana C, et al. Gynecol Endocrinol 2010;26:617.
5.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
P211
PITUITARY TUMOR AND BLOOD CALCIUM LEVELS
E. Petrova1, E. D. Becheru2, A. I. Trandafir2, A. Draghici2, N. Dumitru1,
A. Dumitrascu2, A. Ghemigian1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Patients with pituitary adenomas may associate primary
hyperparathyroidism (PHP) – related hypercalcemia in cases with
MEN1 (multiple endocrine neoplasia) syndrome, but, on daily practice,
the levels of blood calcium may vary with the degree of dehydration or
with calcium daily intake (1-5). We aim to introduce an adult female with
a pituitary macroadenoma and calcium profile anomalies
Case report: This is a 56-year-old, nonsmoking female, with menopause
at the age of 48 y, who was admitted a decade ago for persistent headache
which lead to the detection of a pituitary tumour of 1.2x0.7 cm in contact
with cavernous sinus. A mild elevation of prolactin level (48 ng/mL,
normal <29 ng/mL) required dopamine agonists therapy (weekly
cabergoline 1.5 mg) while neurosurgery was postponed. During follow-
up, IGF-1 values remain within normal limits, so was DXA evaluation,
while total serum calcium levels were detected several times mildly
elevated (10.5 mg/dL, with normal range 8.5-10.2 mg/dL) in association
with a mild elevation of PTH which was not confirmed at reassessment
thus the diagnosis of PHP was not confirmed. However, the patient
associated two gallstones of 2.2 cm, respective 1.8 cm which required
surgical removal of gall bladder. The mild increase of PTH was
associated with low levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D=9 ng/mL (normal
>30 ng/mL) which required cholecalciferol supplements. After 10 years
since first diagnosed, the pituitary macroadenoma increased to
1.6x1.2 cm and selective hypophysectomy was necessary. No MEN1
syndrome criteria were confirmed.
Conclusion: In this case, the presence of mild elevation of calcium levels
was probably related to oral diet intake, not with MEN1 syndrome.
References:
1.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
2.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
3.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
4.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2438.
5.
Poiana C, et al. Maturitas 2009;62:98.
P212
ZOLENDRONIC ACID AFTER TERIPARATIDE: PANDEMIC
OBSERVATIONS
E. Petrova1, C. M. Alexandru2, A. I. Trandafir2, G. Voicu2, A.
Ghemigian1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Teriparatide for sever osteoporosis is followed by
antiresorptive drugs, and one option in patients with gastric intolerance
is zolendronic acid or denosumab (1-5). During pandemic lockdown, the
access to bone assessment was limited (1-5). Type 1 diabetic patients are
particularly at risk for bone loss, but also for COVID-19 infection, thus
the importance of respecting the pandemic rules (1-5). We aim to
introduce a female case diagnosed with severe menopausal osteoporosis
that was followed during post-teriparatide sequence of medication,
including during pandemic days.
Case report: This is a type 1 diabetic female of 77 y who was first
diagnosed with menopausal osteoporosis 8 y ago (lumbar T-score of -
3.1 SD) and started medication with weekly alendronate in addition to
vitamin D supplements. After 3 y, she suffered a single spontaneous
vertebral fracture thus teriparatide was initiated for 2 y (with good
tolerance): lumbar T-score went from -3.1 to -1.9 SD. In the meantime,
due to bilateral coxarthrosis she needed bilateral hip replacement. Further
on, she continued with biannually denosumab for 8 injections, reaching a
lumbar BMD-DXA 0.942 g/cm2, T-score of -2 SD, Z-score of -0.8 SD so
an intravenous perfusion with zolendronic acid 5 mg was administered
plus vitamin D supplements. While she had no additional fracture and
glycated haemoglobin A1c remained around 6.2-6.4%, one year later, the
pandemic started, so only bone turnover markers (BTM) were assessed,
not DXA: suppressed CrossLaps=0.22 ng/mL (normal: 0.33-0.782 ng/
mL), osteocalcin=11 ng/mL (normal: 15-46 ng/mL), P1NP=27 pg/mL
(normal: 15-45 pg/mL). She continued with vitamin D, and 20 months
after injection CrossLaps remained low (=22 ng/mL) with normal
osteocalcin (=15 ng/mL), P1NP (=28 pg/mL) and stationary BMD.
Conclusion: Zolendronic acid effect in osteoporotic patients is easy to
access by blood assays if DXA is not available, while lack of BTM
increase is suggestive for a good outcome.
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Bone Res 2013;1:275.
2.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
S159
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
3.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
4.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;70:3176.
5.
Radu L, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3483.
P213
O S T E O P O R O S I S - R E L A T E D
T O L O N G - T E R M
HYPERTHYROIDISM ON A PATIENT WITH ESOPHAGIAN
LEIOYOMA
E. Petrova1, A. Draghici2, I. C. Raducu2, C. M. Alexandru2, E. D.
Becheru2, I. A. Voinea2, A. Ghemigian1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Approach of patients with menopausal osteoporosis and
associated hormonal and/or metabolic risk factors requires a particular
attention, especially in patients with multiple morbidities (1-5). We aim
to present a case of a menopausal woman diagnosed with osteoporosis
after a long time of uncontrolled hyperthyroidism, also displaying several
morbidities that influenced her decision to follow the therapy.
Case report: This is a 58-year-old, nonsmoking female, initially admitted
for neck compressive symptoms. She is known with suppressed TSH for
several years and she refused therapy. A large multinodular goiter is
confirmed (2 nodules with calcifications of maximum 2.5 cm at identified
at ultrasound). She associates essential thrombocytosis, NYHA class III
cardiac failure, a history of pulmonary thromboembolism and a recent
diagnosis of oesophageal leiomyoma. Due to cardiovascular risk, after
achieving control of thyroid function using thiamazole, I131 radioiodine
therapy induced iatrogenic hypothyroidism and she continued with
levothyroxine substitution. Bone evaluation revealed osteoporosis:
lumbar L1-4 BMD of 0.83 g/cm2, T-score of -2.9 SD, Z-score of -2.5
SD. Also, a thoracic T9 vertebral fracture was identified. Due to
oesophageal tumour and associated risk of reflux, oral antiresorptive
drugs are not indicated. Injectable bisphosphonates and denosumab as
well as teriparatide represented a potential therapy which the patient
refused due to multiple concomitant drugs for mentioned morbidities.
Vitamin D supplements were started.
Conclusion: Despite multiple levels of drugs against osteoporosis, real
life medicine has shown us that the compliance/adherence to therapy
decided by the patient is markedly influenced by concomitant
medications and severe non-bone related diseases which might make
the picture of osteoporosis and osteoporotic fractures not an essential
target to treat.
References:
1.
Sandru F, et al. Rom J Military Med 2020:123:166.
2.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
3.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;70:3176.
4.
Radu L, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3483.
5.
Poiana C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:187.
P214
POST COVID SEQUELAE ORTHOPAEDIC ASSOCIATED
SYMPTOMS OF 60 PATIENTS: A CASE SERIES WITH 8
MONTHS OF FOLLOW UP
D. R. Jain Mch1
1Karun Jain, Delhi, India
Introduction: Post Covid-19, pulmonary complications are well
understood but there are no studies that specifically investigate the
frequency, characteristics and presentation patterns of orthopaedic
associated symptoms in COVID-19 recovered patients. Objective: to
evaluate the variety of orthopaedic symptoms and their frequency,
localization, and severity in covid recovered patients to understand better,
impact of Covid-19 on musculoskeletal system. Methods: Diagnosed &
recovered 60 cases of Covid-19, who were admitted between June &
July 2020 & visited orthopaedic OPDs for regular monthly follow-up
were prospectively analysed for 8 months. Clinical examination and
questionnaire about orthopaedic symptoms and their frequency,
localization, severity and their use of analgesics & overall quality of life.
Results: 60 post covid recovered patient, who were available for 8 months
of follow up were included. Complaints of the patients were 81.6% (49)
fatigue, 73.3% (44) muscle cramps, 66.7 % (40) large joint arthralgia,
51.6% (31) Small joint arthralgia, 48.3 (29) headache, 36.7% (22) back
pain, 23.3% (14) chest pain and 15% (9) non-specific pain. An average of
3 analgesic medicines per week were consumed by study patients. 28
patients were working office population and had taken average of 24 days
off in 8 months follow-up. Conclusion: Our 8 months follow-up data
revealed that fatigue, muscle cramps, large & small joint arthralgia and
back pain can be seen in patients at varying rates for a longer duration after
covid recovery, which in turn affects their day-to-day life and PQLI. Long
term analgesic intake is another area of concern. Keywords: Post covid
sequelae, Orthopedic symptoms, arthralgia, COVID-19, Cramp, Pain
P215
BONE MARROW FAT AS IMAGING MARKER OF SKELETAL
FRAGILITY IN WOMEN WITH POSTSURGICAL
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM
D. Diacinti1, C. Cipriani2, A. Iannacone3, E. Kripa3, M. Orlandi3, J.
Pepe2, L. Colangelo2, D. Diacinti4, S. Minisola2
1Dept. of Oral & Maxillofacial Sciences, Umberto I Hospital, University
Sapienza, Dept. of Diagnostic & Molecular Imaging, Radiology &
Radiotherapy, University Tor Vergata, 2Dept. of Clinical, Internal,
Anesthesiological & Cardiovascular Sciences, Sapienza Rome
University, 3Dept. of Radiological Sciences, Oncology &
Anatomo-Pathology, University Sapienza, 4Dept. of Radiological
Sciences, Oncology & Anatomo-Pathology, University Sapienza,
Rome, Italy
Objective: To assess lumbar spine bone marrow fat (BMF) content in
postmenopausal women with chronic postsurgical HypoPT using
magnetic resonance spectroscopy and evaluate how it could be related
to vertebral fragility.
Methods: We studied 28 postmenopausal women with postsurgical
HypoPT (mean age 66±6.8 SD years) and 28 healthy age-matched
women. In all subjects we assessed: lumbar spine (L1-L4), femoral neck
(FN) and total hip (TH) BMD by DXA (Hologic QDR 4500A, USA);
trabecular bone score (TBS) on the L1-L4 images by the TBS-iNsight
software; vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) by iDXA (Lunar, GE,
USA). BMF was measured by 3 Tesla L1-L5 MRI with application of
the PRESS spectroscopy sequences on L3 vertebral body.
Results: HypoPT subjects had significantly higher mean BMD values than
controls (1.044 vs. 0.956 g/cm²; p <0.01), and lower TBS values (1.218 vs.
1.273; p<0.01). Vertebral fractures by VFA were observed in 6/28 (21%)
of HypoPT vs. 3/28 (11%) of healthy subjects. Mean BMF values were
significantly higher in HypoPT compared to healthy subjects: 79% vs.
60% (p<0.05). The percentage of unsaturated, residual and saturated
BMF in the HypoPT group were 5%, 6% and 68%; in healthy subjects
9%, 3%, 48%, respectively. We observed statistically significant negative
correlations between BMF values and both BMD (R=0.517; p<0.03) and
TBS (R=0.767; p<0.03) in the HypoPT group. When only patients with
vertebral fractures were compared, BMF was higher in HypoPT than in
healthy subjects (62% vs. 78%; p<0.05).
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that BMF assessed by magnetic
resonance spectroscopy at the lumbar spine is increased in
postmenopausal women with chronic postsurgical HypoPT and is
associated with increased prevalence of fragility fractures at this level.
Hence, adipogenesis may be stimulated in the trabecular bone in the
absence of PTH and associated with skeletal fragility.
S160
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P216
FGF23 IS ASSOCIATED WITH TRABECULAR BONE SCORE
BUT NOT BONE MINERAL DENSITY IN EARLY STAGES OF
CKD: RESULTS OF THE CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY
Z. Kužmová1, M. Kužma1, A. Gažová1, Z. Killinger1, P. Jackuliak1, J.
Kyselovič1, J. Payer1
1Comenius University Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia
Objective: Newer markers of kidney damage and mineral and bone
changes in chronic kidney disease (CKD) are needed. This study aimed
to evaluate BMD and trabecular bone score (TBS) in relationship with
new laboratory markers of CKD, such as FGF23 and klotho.
Methods: A cross-sectional study during July 2018-July2019 was
conducted. Plasma levels of soluble klotho and FGF23 were determined
by ELISA. All patients undergone BMD and TBS measurement. Patients
were divided into 2 groups as follows: A - patients in stages G1-G3; B -
patients in stages G4-G5 according to KDIGO.
Results: A total of 74 CKD patients (42 males, 32 females; mean age
68.8 y) were included in the study. Greater FGF23 levels in group B
(N=15) in comparison to group A (N=59) (p=0.001) were observed.
FGF23 was associated with glomerular filtration (GF) (R=-0.43;
p=0.003), with greater levels of FGF23 at GF <0.8 ml/s. Significant
difference in TBS within first 3 CKD stages (mean TBS in G1=1.374
vs. G2=1.304 vs. G3a=1.24; p=0.03) and negative correlation of FGF23
and TBS (R=-0.33; p=0.05) and a positive correlation between klotho and
TBS (R=0.419; p=0.04) was observed.
Conclusion: This study confirmed that FGF23 is associated with TBS.
However, TBS reflects kidney function decline only in first 3 stages of
CKD. Thus, FGF23 together with TBS are promising markers of early
trabecular bone impairment in CKD.
P217
VITAMIN D INSUFFICIENCY IS ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER
TRABECULAR BONE SCORE BUT NOT BONE MINERAL
DENSITY IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
M. Kužma1, Z. Kužmová1, P. Jackuliak1, Z. Killinger1, J. Payer1
1Comenius University Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia
Objective: The contribution of vitamin D to fracture risk reduction can be
attributed, at least in part, to a beneficial effect on BMD. However, less
evidence to explain the effect of vitamin D on bone microarchitecture
exists. This study aimed to assess the relationship between 25(OH)D3
levels and BMD and trabecular bone score (TBS) in postmenopausal
women.
Methods: A cross-sectional study in postmenopausal women (mean
age=64 y) from endocrinology outpatient clinic undergoing DXA
examination during 10/2015 to 03/2017 was conducted. In all subjects,
measurement of BMD and TBS was performed. 25(OH)D3 levels were
determined by chromatography using an HPLC system with UV
detection (Chromsystem®) (interassay variability CV: 0.8-3%). From
total number of 347 subjects; 129 fulfilled inclusion criteria. Study group
was than divided in two groups according to serum concentration of
vitamin D. A level of 30 ng/ml was considered as the cutoff value.
Results: The prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency in the study group
was 49.6%. Patients with vitamin D >30 ng/ml (N=67) in comparison to
patients with vitamin D <30 ng/ml (N=64) had greater proportion of
patients treated with vitamin D supplement (55 vs. 35; p=0.05) and higher
TBS values (1,276 vs. 1,241; p=0.05). No difference in L-spine, total hip
or neck BMD was observed.
Conclusion: This study shows that sufficient vitamin D levels in
postmenopausal women are associated with better bone microstructure,
as assessed by TBS, but not BMD. A prospective follow-up to better
understand relationship between levels of vitamin D and bone structure
is needed.
P218
FRACTURE RISK ASSESSMENT AFTER KIDNEY
TRANSPLANTATION
S. Mazurenko1, Y. Nakatis1, O. Mazurenko2, E. Semenova3
1Saint Petersburg State University, 2North-Western District Scientific &
Clinical Center L. G. Sokolov, Federal Medical and Biological Agency,
3North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov, Saint
Petersburg, Russia
Objective: Epigenetic clocks are composed of a selection of CpG sites
which have the potential to capture ‘biological age’ and provide a
measure of age acceleration (calculated as the difference between
biological and chronological age). Here we investigate the associations
between age acceleration (according to three different clocks: Horvath
pan-tissue, GrimAge and PhenoAge) and hip DXA parameters.
Methods: Participants were recruited across three generations of the
Hertfordshire Intergenerational Study; original cohort members, their
children, and grandchildren. Hip DXA was performed (Lunar iDXA,
GE Healthcare) and whole blood DNA methylation was analysed using
the Illumina 850k array (Infinium MethylationEPIC BeadChip) following
which GrimAge, PhenoAge and Horvath pan-tissue age acceleration
were calculated. Associations with DXA hip measures (including
BMD, bone mineral content (BMC) and bone area) were analysed using
linear regression in sex-stratified unadjusted models and those adjusted
for age and BMI. Results are presented as β coefficients with 95%CIs.
Results: A total of 114 participants (39 males, 75 females) were recruited,
mean age of 56 y (range 18-88). Relationships varied in different clocks;
Horvath pan-tissue age acceleration was not associated with DXA
measures in any models. However, greater GrimAge acceleration was
associated with significantly lower hip BMC (β=-0.94 (-1.50,-0.38),
p<0.01 and lower bone area (β=-0.28 (-0.55,-0.01), p<0.05) in males in
fully adjusted models, and with lower hip BMD in males in unadjusted
models (β=-0.02 (-0.04,-0.01), p<0.05). Greater PhenoAge acceleration
was associated with lower hip BMC in males in models adjusted for age
and BMI (β=-0.34 (-0.65,-0.03), p<0.05) and lower hip BMD in males in
unadjusted models only (β=-0.01 (-0.02,-0.00), p<0.05). No significant
associations were observed in females.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that the newer iterations of
epigenetic clocks (GrimAge and PhenoAge) which were designed to
measure age-related phenotypic changes are associated with bone
measures at the hip, whereas the first generation clocks (Horvath pan-
tissue) were not. These sex-specific associations require further
investigation.
P219
ASSESSMENT OF THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS ACTIVITY AND BODY
COMPOSITION
K. Nassar1, A. Ajerouassi2, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., Hassan II
University of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2Department of Rheumatology,
Ibn Rochd University Hospital Center, Hassan II University, Faculty of
Medicine & Pharmacy, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is associated with altered body
composition, which can result in rheumatoid cachexia caused by the
S161
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
inflammatory factors. RA patients often present with low muscle mass
and decreased strength with high fat mass. The muscle changes may
occur in the early stages of RA and persist throughout the disease duration
like the excess of fat mass. The purpose of the study is to assess the link
between the activity of the RA and the change of the fat and lean body
mass.
Methods: Transversal and descriptive monocentric study conducted in
26 RA patients followed in the rheumatology department at the
University Hospital Ibn Rochd. The study include 13 patients with active
RA and 13 control group with remission disease. Demographic
characteristics were noted in all patients as well as disease activity and
treatment characteristics. All patients underwent a DXA with evaluation
of the body mass precisely the lean and the fat mass. Finally the data of
the 2 groups were compared to assess the relationship between disease
activity and disturbances in body mass.
Results: 26 patients were included. The mean age was 52±10.3,
predominantly female (92.3%. The mean BMI was 26.2±6.4. 7.6% are
diabetic, 3.8% are smoking 53.8% are postmenopausal. Mean duration of
RA 12±7.4 y. Mean sedimentation rate was at 57.4±31 mm/1e h and CRP
at 26.6±24.1 mg/l. The DAS 28 m CRP was at 3.59±1.35. The DXA
found T-score m at the lumbar spine at (-2.1±1.39), femoral neck at (-1.33
±1.32) and the total hip at (-1.13±1.30). Concerning the evaluation of
body mass, we found the following results: Total leg average fat mass
(g) at 3731±2390, total leg mean lean mass (g) at 9267±2619, total leg
BMC (g) at 446±159. The whole body average fat (g) at 17715±13322,
the average lean whole body (g) at 46883±5802 and the BMC whole
body (g) at 2201±346 (Table).
Conclusion: The assessment of fat and lean mass is important in patients
followed for chronic inflammatory rheumatism such as RA. Inflammation
induces an increase in fat mass and a decrease in lean mass with the risk of
osteoporosis and fall, especially in patients with active rheumatism and
obesity. Our study showed an increase in fat content in patients with active
RA but without statistically significant difference with the control group.
Regarding the lean mass, the expected results were not found in our study.
This can be explained by the low number of patients and the few associated
comorbidities. The changes in body composition during RA are linked to a
cascade of metabolic abnormalities with inflammatory factors. There are
multiple, complex interactions which remain largely unknown.
Table. Population characteristics and the assessment of the link between
active RA and body mass
Remission RA
Active RA PR
p-value
Number = 13
Number 13
Demographic characteristics
Mean age
58±7.5
45.9±9.2
Women
100% (13)
84.6% (11)
Men
0
76.9% (2)
Mean body index
24.1±6.1
28.3±6
Menopause
77% (10)
15.3% (4)
Treatments
AINS
38.4% (5)
76.9% (2)
Corticosteroids
42.3% (11)
77% (10)
Mean dose
13.3
16.6
Mean duration
9.5
4.7
MTX
38.4% (5)
61.5% (8)
SLZ
23% (3)
76.9% (2)
Leflunomid
23% (3)
3.8% (1)
Synthetic antimalarial
15.3% (4)
3.8% (1)
Disease characteristics
Mean duration
12.19±8.2
11.9±6.6
0.37
Mean age
45±12
34.4±10.5
0.04
Mean sedimentation rate
59.4±36.8
62.1±22.4
0.08
Mean C-reactive protein
21.4±19.9
31.4±26.5
0.008
Mean DAS 28 CRP
2.48±0.48
4.7±0.9
Mean BMD (T-score)
Lumbar spine
0.887 ±0.174
(-2.1±1.27)
0.915 ±0.185
(-2.06
±1.44)
0.08
Femoral neck
0.729 ±0.126
(-1.68
±0.90)
0.835±0.185
(-1±1.55)
0 .16
Total hip
0.753±0.133
(-1.65
±1.03)
0.923±0.153
(-0.6±1.33)
0.04
Whole Body
Mean total leg fat mass (g)
3286± 2107
4177±2567
0.21
Mean total leg lean mass (g) 9074±3387
9461±1474
0.28
Total leg BMC (g)
410±195
482±100
0.11
Mean whole body fat (g)
15022±12819
20408±13271
0.2
Mean whole body
lean mass (g)
43871±4700
49895±5205
0.001
Whole body BMC (g)
2059±333
2342±298
0.02
P220
VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY AND RISK OF OSTEOPOROTIC
THORACOLUMBAR VERTEBRAL FRACTURES: IS THERE
ANY CORRELATION?
G. Kakadiya1
1Fortis Hospital, Mohali, India
Objective: To determine whether serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
(25(OH)D) level is associated with osteoporotic thoracolumbar junction
vertebral fracture (VFx) in elderly patients.
Methods: From June 2016 to Dec 2018, this retrospective case-control
study included 267 patients with primary osteoporotic thoracolumbar
junction VFx (T10-L2) and 285 elderly orthopaedic patients with back
pain (without osteoporotic VFx) as controls. Serum 25(OH)D levels were
measured and the association with osteoporotic VFx was analysed. Other
clinical data, including BMI, comorbidities, and BMD, were also
collected and compared between these two groups.
Results: It was shown that 25(OH)D levels were significantly lower in
patients with T10-L2 VFx than in control patients. Among 267 VFx
patients, 78.1% patients showed grade 2-3 fractures. Serum 25(OH)D
levels were significantly related to affected vertebral numbers and VFx
severities. The VFx risk was 28% lower (OR=0.72, 95%CI 0.62-0.83) per
increased SD in serum 25(OH)D. Compared with the 1st quartile (mean
25(OH)D: 29.67±6.18 nmol/L), the VFx risk was significantly lower in
the 3rd (mean 25(OH)D: 60.91±5.12 nmol/L) and 4th quartiles (mean
25(OH)D: 103.3±44.21 nmol/L), but not in the 2nd quartile (mean
25(OH)D: 45.40±3.95 nmol/L). In contrast, the VFx risk was
significantly increased in the 1stquartile (OR=1.87, 95%CI 1.42-2.45)
compared with the 2nd-4th quartiles.
Conclusion: Vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency was associated with the
risk of osteoporotic thoracolumbar junction vertebral fractures in elderly
patients.
S162
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure. Diagnosis of osteoporotic vertebral fractures and spinal
deformities in thoracolumbar junction region. (A) Grade 0, normal
vertebral shape; (B) Grade 1 (mild), a reduction in vertebral height of
20-25%; (C) Grade 2 (moderate), a reduction of 26-40%; (D) Grade 3
(severe), a reduction of over 40%. (E, F) Thoracolumbar scoliosis (>10°)
and kyphosis (>15°) measured at T10-L2 region on coronal and sagittal
plane using the Cobb method.
P221
TIME TO REVISIT ‘ABSOLUTE’ AND ‘RELATIVE’
CONTRAINDICATIONS OF VERTEBROPLASTY: CASE
SERIES OF 16 PATIENTS WITH NEUROLOGICAL DEFICITS
WITH VERTEBRA PLANA AND POSTERIOR/ANTERIOR
WALL DEFECTS TREATED WITH VERTEBROPLASTY AND
CEMENT AUGMENTED SCREW FIXATION
G. Kakadiya1, D. Joshi1
1Fortis Hospital, Mohali, India
Objective: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of vertebroplasty with
cement augmented pedicle screws for osteoporotic vertebra plana and
posterior/anterior wall defects fracture in neurological deficits patients.
Methods: It was a case series of thoracolumbar 16-osteoporotic fracture
(vertebra plana and posterior/anterior wall defects) patients, were treated
by percutaneous vertebroplasty and PMMA cement augmented pedicle
screws fixation. Preoperative and postoperative clinical and radiological
parameters (kyphotic angle, compression ratio, the visual analog scale
(VAS) for back pain, and the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) were
analyzed.
Results: The average age of the patient was 68.88. Mean blood loss was
312.5 ml and mean surgical duration was 170.6 min. A significant
improvement was noted in VAS (preoperative, 7.90 ±0.60; final follow-
up 2.90±0.54) and ODI (preoperative 77.10±6.96, postoperative 21.30
±6.70). Neurological improvement was noted in all patients (Frankel
D). Vertebral height and kyphotic angle of the compressed vertebral
bodies were significantly corrected, preoperative 22.14±2.60 to
postoperative 10.40±1.40 with 10% (2.5±0.90) loss of correction at final
follow-up. No cement leakage was found. No implant related
complication was seen. No iatrogenic dural or nerve injury.
Conclusion: Treatment with vertebroplasty with cement augmented
screw fixation and direct decompression is a great option in treating
such a complex situation in fragile age with fragile bones because It
provides anterior support with cementing that avoids corpectomy.
Short segment pedicle screws fixation avoids stress risers at the
junctional area.
P222
LONGITUDINAL CHANGE IN BONE MINERAL DENSITY
AMONG ADULTS AGED 55 YEARS AND OLDER USING THE
HEALTHY AGING LONGITUDINAL STUDY IN TAIWAN
(HALST)
T.-J. H. Hsieh1, W.-J. Chen2, J. Ku2, C. A. Hsiung1, C.-C. Hsu1
1Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, 2Amgen Taiwan Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan
Objective: To describe the change in BMD over 6 y among adults aged
55 y and older by sex and osteoporosis status.
Methods: Participants included the cohort of healthy adults from HALST
having BMD measurements at baseline and at follow-up (follow-up
duration (mean±SD): 6.1±0.5 y). BMD of lumbar spine (L1-L4) was
measured using DXA by operators following standardized procedures
at 4 sites in HALST. Osteoporosis status at baseline was defined by a
BMD T-score as osteoporosis (T-score ≤-2.5), osteopenia (-2.5 < T-score
< -1), or normal status (T-score ≥-1). Longitudinal BMD change was
calculated as the percent change between the baseline BMD and the
follow-up BMD. A 3% BMD change has been considered as the least
significant change (LSC) at the lumbar spine to be of potential clinical
significance beyond measurement imprecision.
Results: Among the 1508 participants with BMD measurements at
baseline and follow-up; at baseline, 52% (n=782) were women, 62%
(n=932) aged 65 y and older, 14% (n=215) had osteoporosis, 33%
(n=500) had osteopenia, and 3% (n=47) had a recent history of an
S163
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
antiosteoporotic medication. At 6 y of follow-up, the largest BMD
reduction had occurred among women aged between 55-65 y (-3.1%,
95%CI: -3.8%, -2.4%) (Figure). For all other healthy aging adults, there
were no changes in BMD beyond the LSC of 3%.
Conclusion: Among healthy adults in Taiwan aged 55 y and older,
women aged 55-65, soon after menopause, experienced the most
significant BMD loss in lumbar spine in a 6-y observation period.
These women may benefit most from potential interventions to reduce
bone loss and risk of developing osteoporosis. For the other healthy
adults, men aged 55 y and older and women aged 65 y and older, who
have relatively stable measurements of BMD over 6 y, a one-time DXA
screening appears adequate to identify those at high risk for an
osteoporotic fracture.
P223
DISTAL SODIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS (DSCB) INJECTION
FOR UPPER LIMB NEUROPATHIC PAIN: AN OUTPATIENT
CASE SERIES OF 50 PATIENTS AND REVIEW OF
LITERATURE
D. R. Jain Mch1
1Karun Jain, Delhi, India
Objective: Evidence points toward voltage-gated sodium channels
blockers as a key target for novel analgesics. Sodium channel blocker
are the class of drugs that act by inhibition of sodium influx through cell
membranes. Blockade of sodium channels slows the rate and amplitude
of initial rapid depolarization, reduces cell excitabilities and reduces
conduction velocities. DSCB injection is infiltration of local anaesthetic
drugs around nerve sheaths at the most terminal branch along its course,
which leads to the sodium channel blocking effect upwards towards the
dorsal root ganglia and nerve roots, which produce pain due to excitation
after the disease complex. This study aimed to assess the usefulness of
DSCB injection in upper limb pain complex diseases of various origins
Methods: 50 patients of neuropathic upper limb pain with various
severity were followed up for a minimum of 6 months. 20 patients of
cervical disc lesion with nerve root compression (group 1), 20 patients of
adhesive capsulitis (group 3) and 10 patients with overlapping of both
diseases (group 3) were included in the study. A mixture of 2 ml 1%
lignocaine, 30 μg clonidine, 40 mg 1ml of methylprednisolone acetate
injected in first web space of affected limbs two times, one month apart.
Assessment is done by visual analogue scale (VAS) pain score and
clinical examination. Significant improvement is considered, if VAS
score reduces by 5 or more. 30° or more, pain-free improvement of range
of motion (ROM) is considered significant. Number of analgesics taken
per week also enquired.
Results: Patients in Group 1, 2 and 3 had 50%, 60% & 50%,
improvement in VAS score & ROM after first injection and 65%, 75%
& 60%, after second injection respectively. 60%, 65% & 50% patients in
the respective groups, maintained the improvement at the end of 6-month
examination for both VAS score & ROM. An average of 3 analgesic
medicines per week were consumed by study patients.
Conclusion: DSCB injection is simpler, safer, cheaper and effective
outpatient procedure to treat upper limb pain complex of disease of
various origins. However, prospective long term multicentric studies with
larger sample size, are required to understand how these distal nerve
blocks really work. Long term analgesic intake is another area of concern.
P224
ADULT UNTREATED HYPOPITUITARISM AND BONE
E. Petrova1, E. D. Becheru2, I. C. Raducu2, I. A. Voinea2, M. Popescu3,
A. Ghemigian1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, Bucharest, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy
Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Hypopituitarism associated or ovarian related amenorrhea
negatively impacts bone status in teenagers and young adults if left
untreated, first by impairing the achievement of peak bone mass, then
by anomalies of bone turnovers and estrogen-connected bone loss (1-5).
We aim to introduce an adult female case who was noncompliant to
hypopituitarism therapy with negative bone effects.
Case report: This is a 36-year-old, nonsmoking female who is admitted
for nonspecific bone and joints. The family medical history is negative.
The personal medical history includes the diagnosis of empty sella-related
hypopituitarism (no genetic testing was done) which lead to therapy with
growth hormone (GH) from the age of 12-15 y due to GH deficiency;
therapy with daily levothyroxine 25 μg from the age of 12 y to 30 y for
central hypothyroidism (CH) and delayed puberty which required
priming with estrogens followed estro-progrestative therapy for
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH); despite a good tolerance, the
subject decided to stop it and remained in amenorrhea for the last 7 y.
On current admission, adequate levels of vitamin D are detected in
addition to low BMD for age (a Z-score at lumbar DXA of -2.5 SD).
Endocrine panel confirmed HH by FSH/LH ratio =0.166/0.1 mUI/mL,
and CH by TSH of 0.6 μUI/mL (normal: 0.5-4.5 μUI/mL), and FT4 of
6.6 pmol/L(normal: 9-19 pmol/L).
Conclusion: Adult GH deficiency may also have an impact on
bone/muscle status but in some countries, as ours, GH for adults is not
applicable. Routine DXA is useful in young adult patients with untreated
hypopituitarism in terms of HH.
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Gynecol Endocrinol 2010;26:617.
2.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
3.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;70:3176.
4.
Sandru F, et al. Rom J Military Med 2020:123:166.
5.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2438.
P225
TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS AND LOW TBS: ANY
THERAPY?
E. Petrova1, G. Voicu2, A. Goldstein2, A. Ghemigian1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (2DM) associates not only a large
panel of cardiometabolic complications, but also muscle-skeletal damage
(1-5). Low trabecular bone score (TBS), blunt bone turnover markers
S164
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
potentially associated with vitamin D deficit represent the hallmark of
2DM (1-5). We aim to introduce a diabetic male case in relationship to
the therapy decision based on low TBS values, but not BMD at central
DXA assay.
Case report: This is a 68-year-old, nonsmoking male, known with 2DM,
chronic high blood pressure, overweight, and persistent
hypomagnesemia, is admitted for chronic, nonspecific bone pain. On
admission, blood glucose was 187 mg/dL with uncontrolled 2DM
(glycated haemoglobin A1c of 7.3% with normal levels <6.5%, under
daily metformin 2000 mg/d). 25OHD was of 19 ng/mL, with normal
calcium (total serum of 9.3 mg/dL, normal values between 8.5-10.2 mg/
dL) and PTH. Serum magnesium of 1.4 mg/dL (normal: 1.6-2.6 mg/dL)
with normal thyroid and kidney function, and low alkaline
phosphatase=35 U/L (normal: 40-150 U/L) were identified. The bone
evaluation revealed normal BMD for age (a T-score of 1.9 SD) with
decreased TBS of 1,169. Screening profile spine X-Ray did not identified
a fracture. A better control of 2DM and vitamin D supplements were
recommended for the moment.
Conclusion: If persistent low magnesium might deteriorate the bone
quality is debatable. The nonspecific leg pain might be related to low
magnesium, diabetic neuropathy and hypovitaminosis D. This case
addresses a current challenge of daily practitioners, namely the decision
of introducing antiresorptive drugs in type 2 diabetic persons who display
normal or high-normal BMD.
References:
1.
Sandru F, et al. Rom J Military Med 2020:123:166.
2.
Iorga AM, et al. Exp Ther Med 2020;20:2396.
3.
Paduraru DN, et al. Chirurgia (Bucur) 2019;114:564.
4.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
5.
Poiana C. et al. Bone Res 2013;1:275.
P226
ROLE OF THE ENDOVANILLOID/ENDOCANNABINOID
SYSTEM IN THE MODULATION OF OSTEOCLAST
ACTIVITY IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PAGET'S DISEASE OF
BONE
M. P. Paoletta1, S. L. Liguori1, A. M. Moretti1, G. I. Iolascon1
1Dept. of Medical & Surgical Specialties and Dentistry, University of
Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy
Objective: To compare osteoclast (OC) expression of endocannabinoid/
endovanillod (EC/EV) system in patients with Paget’s disease of the bone
(PDB) and healthy people and to investigate the modulation effect of
specific agents targeting EC/EV system on OC activity in this metabolic
bone disorder.
Methods: In vitro OCs were differentiated from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of patient with PDB and healthy donors.
Characterization by real-time PCR and western blot were performed for
evaluating the expression of CB2 and TRPV1 receptors. TRAP assay and
bone resorption assay were performed to evaluate OCs activity before and
after 48 h exposure to CB2 (JWH-133 and AM630) and TRPV1
(resiniferatoxin (RTX), iodoresiniferatoxin (I-RTX) selective drugs.
Results: Four women with PDB (3 with polyostotic form) and 4 age-
matched controls were enrolled. Real-time PCR evidenced a significant
higher expression of CB2 gene in OCs patients with PDB compared to
healthy controls, while no between-group difference for TRPV1 gene
expression were found. Western blot analysis evidenced a significant
increase of CB2 protein expression in patients with PDB compared to
healthy controls. TRAP Assay showed a significant reduction of
multinucleated TRAP+ OCs (n≥3) after treatment with JWH-133, and
no significant changes after treatment with AM630. A significant increase
of the number of active OCs was found after treatment with RTX, while
treatment with I-RTX induced a significant reduction in the number of
OCs in patients with PDB compared to healthy controls. Bone resorption
assay showed a significant reduction of resorption areas in in vitro
samples treated with JWH-133 while a significant increase of the number
and size of bone resorption areas after treatment with AM630 were found.
Treatment with I-RTX did not show a significant reduction bone
resorption area compared to untreated controls.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrate the expression of EC/EV system by
OCs in patient affected by PBD suggesting a role of these receptors in this
condition. Moreover, the significant impact on bone resorption in using
specific agents addressing CB2 and TRPV1 receptors on OCs opens new
therapeutic scenarios in patients with PDB in addition to current
therapeutic options.
P227
SCREENING IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF EARLY DISORDERS OF
CARBOHYDRATE METABOLISM
O. V. Paramonova1, L. N. Shilova1, E. G. Korenskaya1
1Volgograd State Medical University, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: To assess the significance of screening in identifying early
disorders of carbohydrate metabolism in residents of Volgograd.
Methods: On the basis of the City Clinical Hospital 25 in 2020, screening
of early disorders of carbohydrate metabolism was conducted. The
screening involved persons over 40 y of age with risk factors (obesity,
hypertension, a history of elevated glycemic levels above 5.5 mmol/l, a
family history of type 2 diabetes). The study group consisted of
approximately equal numbers of men and women. All subjects were
tested for fasting glucose, an oral glucose-tolerance test, and the level of
glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) was determined.
Results: The screening involved 100 people who had no history of type 2
diabetes and no complaints of carbohydrate metabolism disorders at the
time of the examination. The subjects were treated in hospital for other
therapeutic and surgical diseases. The average age of the subjects was 55
±7.4 y. Of these, 56 (56%) people were found to have a risk of developing
carbohydrate metabolism disorders. During the oral glucose-tolerance
test, 20 (20%) of the examined patients were found to have impaired
carbohydrate metabolism, which was confirmed by the definition of
HbA1c. The average level of glycemia according to the screening data
was 5.9±1.24 mmol/l, HbA1c 6.3±0.17%. In 6 of the examined
individuals (6%), reliable type 2 diabetes mellitus was detected. The
differences in the gender ratio by sex were not significant.
Conclusion: Screening in individuals with risk factors is an urgent task,
since it allows us to identify patients with early manifestations of
carbohydrate metabolism disorders, which contributes to the prevention
of possible vascular complications.
P228
THE ROLE OF ANTIBODIES TO ELASTIN IN VARIOUS
CLINICAL VARIANTS OF THE COURSE OF SYSTEMIC
SCLERODERMA
E. G. Korenskaya1, O. V. Paramonova1, L. N. Shilova1, O. D. Korolik1
1Volgograd State Medical University, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: The relevance of studying elastin as an antigen is determined
by its high prevalence in organs and tissues that undergo significant
deformations under the influence of loads (ligaments, skin, lungs, blood
vessels). Elastin, being a high molecular protein, contains a large number
of antigenic determinants. The aim of the study was to identify
differences in the number of antibodies to elastin in different clinical
variants of the course of systemic scleroderma.
S165
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: We examined 42 patients with SDS, including 11 men (26.2%)
and 31 women (73.8%) aged 22-72 y. The average age of the patients was
44.1±15.4 y. The average age of patients at the time of examination was
44.1 y. The average duration of the disease is 9.2 y. Diffuse form of
systemic scleroderma was diagnosed in 18 patients (42.9%), limited in
24 (57.1%). Minimal activity of the disease was detected in 16 patients
(38.1%), moderate in 22 (52.4%), high in 4 (9.5%) patients. The median
duration of the disease in the observed group was 9.2±7.4 y (range 2-27
y). The relationship between the detection of antibodies to elastin and the
presence of a certain clinical and immunological variant of systemic
scleroderma was studied, characterizing the latter in accordance with
the prevalence of the skin process, the rate of formation of the main
symptom complex and the spectrum of organ damage. To determine
the content of antibodies to elastin, an indirect version of the enzyme
immunoassay was used.
Results: Most clinical manifestations occurred in approximately equal
proportions in patients with the presence of antibodies to elastin and
negative for this trait. Statistically significant differences between the
clinical groups were found only for joint damage (arthritis/tenosynovitis)
and lung damage (bilateral basal pneumosclerosis) (p<0.001). The results
obtained should be considered in the light of the possible involvement of
antibodies to elastin in the pathogenesis of these clinical manifestations,
since it is the ligamentous apparatus and the lungs that are the main place of
concentration of elastin fibers. The revealed patterns are not accidental:
elastic fibers are found in large quantities in the ligaments and lung tissue,
so the autoimmune process affecting elastin is manifested by the
corresponding symptoms.
Conclusion: Analyzing the results obtained in our study, we can assume
the participation of antibodies to elastin in the processes of remodeling of
the pulmonary parenchyma leading to a decrease in the elasticity of the
pulmonary framework and an aggravation of the processes of fibrosis.
Thus, in systemic scleroderma, the presence of antibodies to elastin is
associated with damage to the joints and pulmonary parenchyma.
P229
PANNICULITIS IN RHEUMATOLOGY PRACTICE: SPECIFIC
FEATURES OF CLINICAL COURSE AND OUTCOMES
O. Egorova1, B. Belov1
1V. A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Panniculitis (Pn) is a heterogenic group of inflammatory
diseases with predominant involvement of subcutaneous adipose tissue
and may occasionally be seen in clinical practice by many specialists.
Although, fever, skin symptoms and joints involvement alongside with
pronounced rise of acute phase inflammation reactants are the reasons for
referral to a rheumatologist. At the same time absence of clear diagnostic
algorithm would result in delayed diagnosis and, consequently,
inadequate treatment. This study aimed to assess clinical course and
clinical outcomes of Pn in current rheumatology practice.
Methods: The study included 209 pts on the record at VA Nasonova
Research Institute of Rheumatology during 2009-2016, (185 females,
24 males, aged 17-80 y) with referral diagnosis of “erythema nodosum
nondifferentiated panniculitis” and disease duration from 1 week to 25
y. Patients’ assessment included general clinical examination,
serological and immunological tests, histological and immunohisto-
chemical analyses, chest CT scan, Doppler ultrasonography of the lower
extremity veins, and tuberculin skin test. Outcomes were evaluated in 1-
6 y.
Results: Secondary to underlying nonrheumatic condition Pn was
identified in 23 pts. The most prevalent Pn types in remaining 186 cases
were erythema nodosum (EN) (121pts), lipodermatosclerosis (LDS) (38)
and Weber-Christian disease (WCD) (18). Symmetrical distribution of
nodules over upper and lower extremities (ULE) was characteristic for
93% of all EN cases. In LDS populations 68% cases had increased mean
BMI, 79% chronic venous insufficiency (CVI), 60% asymmetric
distribution of lesions, mostly over medial leg (92%). In WCD patients
the nodules were covering all ULE surfaces, and in 14 nodules were
found on the trunk. The three Pn types had certain differences in the
clinical course: high clinical and lab activity was documented in
Löfgren syndrome and WCD pts. Asymmetric distribution of nodules
on the legs was characteristic for LDS, nodules on the trunk were specific
for WCD. The highest recurrence rate was documented in WCD pts (39.7
per 100 patient-years), the lowest in Löfgren syndrome pts (15.3 per 100
patient-years). The probability of EN recurrence in Löfgren syndrome pts
was significantly higher in subjects older than 40 y (OR 3.81; p=0.03), in
subjects with late (≥3 months from EN onset) initiation of treatment (OR
8.94; p=0.0008) and in subjects with indurations >5 cm in size (OR 3.65;
p=0,03). The probability of LDS recurrence was significantly higher in
pts with confluent nodules, forming conglomerate masses (OR 4.33;
p=0.037), and pts taking hydroxychloroquine at ≤200 mg/d during ≥6
months (OR 5.25; p=0.019).
Conclusion: Comprehensive examination is needed to identify the
clinical type of Pn. Symmetrical involvement of all extremities is
characteristic for EN in young subjects. Asymmetric nodular rash over
lower extremities in subjects with abnormal BMI and CVI is specific for
LDS. CWD usually presents with nodular rash on the trunk. Identified
risk factor for EN and LDS recurrence should be taken into consideration
while writing a treatment plan.
P230
RISK FACTORS FOR GASTROINTESTINAL AND RENAL
EVENTS BY TYPE OF LONG-TERM NSAID INITIATED: A
REAL-WORLD STUDY OF COMMERCIALLY-INSURED
PATIENTS WITH OSTEOARTHRITIS
S. Silverman1, P. Schepman2, J. B. Rice3, C. G. Beck2, A. White3, S.
Thakkar2, C. Fernan3, R. L. Robinson4, B. Emir2
1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center; David Geffen School of Medicine of
University of California Los Angeles, Beverly Hails, 2Pfizer Inc., New
York, 3Analysis Group, Boston, 4Eli Lilly Inc., Indianapolis, USA
Objectives: The goal of this research was to evaluate the risk factors
associated with gastrointestinal (GI) events and acute renal failure
(ARF) among patients receiving long-term topical nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), oral traditional NSAIDs (tNSAIDs),
and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors (COX-2s) for management of hip/knee
osteoarthritis (OA).
Methods: The Optum Healthcare Solutions, Inc. claims database
(1/2012-3/2017) was used to identify adult patients >18 with ≥2
diagnoses of hip and/or knee OA. The index date was defined as the first
prescription after the first OA diagnosis. Patients were assigned to cohorts
based on the type of NSAID prescribed on index date. Patients were
required to be continuously-enrolled 6 months before (baseline) and 36
months after (follow-up) the index date. Patients were also required to
have ≥90 d supply of their cohort type of NSAID during year 1 of follow
up. Demographic and clinical characteristics were summarized during
baseline. Logistic regressions were conducted to assess the risk factors
for GI and ARF, respectively.
Results: Data for 23,796 patients were analyzed (18,100 tNSAIDs, 4825
COX-2s, and 871 topical NSAIDs). GI and ARF events during follow-up
ranged from 7.3-8.1% and 8.0-11.0% of cohorts, respectively. For both
GI and ARF, age and baseline healthcare costs were predictive of
incurring these clinical events. In the follow-up period, patients in the
tNSAIDs or COX-2s cohorts had an increased trend of a GI event relative
to topical NSAIDs (OR=1.15, p=0.33 and OR=1.24, p=0.11,
respectively). Other risk factors included a GI event in baseline, such
as, iron-deficient anemia of GI origin (OR=11.08, p<0.01). Prominent
S166
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
risk factors associated with ARF in year 1 of follow-up were being in the
tNSAIDs or COX-2s cohort relative to topical NSAIDs cohort (OR=2.04,
p=0.04 and OR=1.92, p=0.07, respectively).
Conclusion: These findings suggest that important safety considerations
associated with long-term NSAID use vary by NSAID type initiated
following OA diagnosis. This research stresses the importance of
mitigating risk for safe use of NSAIDs.
Disclosure: The study was sponsored by Pfizer and Eli Lilly and
Company.
P231
EFFICACY OF ANTIRESORTIVE TREATMENT IN
OSTEOPOROTIC OLDER ADULTS: A NESTED CASE–
CONTROL STUDY
B. A. Cedeno-Veloz1, J. Erviti Lopez2, M. Gutiérrez-Valencia2, L.
Leache Alegría2, L. C. Saiz Fernandez2, A. M. Rodriguez-Garcia1,
M. Sanchez Latorre1, R. Ramirez Velez3, M. Izquierdo3, N. Martinez-
Velilla1
1Geriatric Dept., Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra (CHN), 2Unit of
Innovation & Organization, Navarre Health Service, 3Dept. of Health
Sciences, Public University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain
Objective: A nested case-control study will be carried out to evaluate the
real life efficacy of antiresorptive treatment regarding the prevention of
osteoporotic hip fractures in older adults with osteoporosis.
Methods: A case-control study nested in a cohort in Spain using the
information from BIFAP (Base de Datos para la Investigación
Farmacoepidemiológica en Atención Primaria, Database for
Pharmacoepidemiologic Research in Primary Care). Cases were defined
as women aged 75 y or older with a first diagnosis of osteoporotic hip
fracture, using the International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC)-1
codes, recorded between 1 January 2016 and 31 December 2019, and
using one of the following drugs: alendronate, etidronate, ibandronate,
risedronate, clodronate minodronate, pamidronate, tiludronate,
zoledronic acid or denosumab. 3 years of follow-up in BIFAP before
the event date. The date of hospitalization served as the index date. All
hip fracture cases were double-checked and validated by both BIFAP and
the research team. We excluded women with any history of cancer, Paget
disease, prevalent hip fracture and fractures resulting from high intense
trauma. For each case, X controls same characteristics but with any of the
drugs involve the study by the time of the index date of their
corresponding case were selected, matched by the same age and calendar
year of enrolment in BIFAP.
Results: Antiresorptive drugs are usually the first-line treatment in older
adults [1]. These drugs have been shown to increase BMD and reduce
fragility fractures in osteoporotic patients [2]. Besides this
pharmacological prevention has proven to be cost-saving in clinical
practice [3]. However, there is no clear evidence in older adults [4]. A
study based on screening for osteoporosis in older women did not reduce
the incidence of osteoporosis-related fractures [5]. However, the analysis
of other national databases has not related the use of bisphosphonates
with fracture reduction [6].
Conclusion: The purpose of our update study will be to determine
the real life evidence of antiresorptive treatment in this specific
population.
References:
1. Alejandro P, Constantinescu F. Clin Geriatr Med 2017;33:27.
2. Crandall CJ, et al. Ann Intern Med 2014;161:711.
3. Svedbom A, et al. Osteoporos Int 2019;30:1745.
4. Ervit J, et al. Front Pharmacol 2017;8:265.
5. Shepstone L, et al. Lancet 2018;391:741.
6. Nordström P, et al. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2017;18:515.
P232
PROTEOMIC CHARACTERIZATION OF BONE, MUSCLE
AND CEREBROSPINAL FLUID IN THE ELDERLY PATIENT
WITH HIP FRACTURE: A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY
B. A. Cedeno-Veloz1, A. M. Rodriguez-Garcia1, F. Zambom Ferrasi2, A.
M. Hidalgo Ovejero3, R. Ramirez Velez2, M. Izquierdo2, N. Martinez-
Velilla1
1Geriatric Dept., Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, 2Department of Health
Sciences, Public University of Navarra, 3Traumatology and Orthopedics
Service, Pamplona, Spain
Objective: To describe the proteomic characterization of bone, muscle
and cerebrospinal fluid in the elderly patient with hip fracture compared
to nonfractured controls.
Methods: This study aims to know the characteristics of the proteomics
of the bones (femoral head), muscle (gluteus maximus) and cerebrospinal
fluid, obtaining a sample of them during the process of osteosynthesis of
hip fracture (in case of fracture hip). In the case of nonfractured controls,
the sample will be obtained during the hip replacement surgery process
(placement of a femoral prosthesis for hip osteoarthritis). Patients who
meet the inclusion criteria and sign the informed consent will become
research subjects. The blood collection will be carried out in the same
admission analysis. The samples of bone, muscle and cerebrospinal fluid
will be made in the surgical act of hip osteosynthesis
Results: Proteomic analysis has become a tool to assess the biological
function of proteins [1]. These tests are useful for discovering potential
therapeutic targets. As bone and muscle [3] deterioration (osteoporosis and
sarcopenia), together with alterations at the brain level, are very important
factors related to hip fracture, knowing its proteomic characteristics in this
context becomes a vitally important objective. The proteomic oxidation
mechanisms have been studied in young or older populations without
incident fracture. Therefore, it is important to study the mechanisms of
affectation of these and their affectation in the muscular and bone function.
The identification of these modified proteomic compounds (oxy-
proteome) [4] can help us understand the mechanisms of protein damage
accumulated in bone and muscle and its potential effect accumulates in
older people with hip fracture. There is a study of the Osteoporotic
Fractures in Men (MrOS) cohort that relates the analysis of 5 proteins with
the incidence of hip fracture (CD14, CHL1, CO7, FCGBP, PZP) [5]. The
proteomic relationship with hip fracture is related to the proinflammatory
state that the accelerated decrease in BMD would have with it [6]. All these
studies also indicate that there is a relationship between brain and bone
(with a greater number of fractures) without the presence of cognitive
impairment being necessary [7]. However, when studying markers in
cerebrospinal fluid, it is more common to find studies in mice in the
literature, with humans being a less studied subject [8].
Conclusion: The purpose of our update study will be to determine the
real life evidence of antiresorptive treatment in this specific population.
References:
1. Megger DA, et al. Biochim Biophys Acta 1834;2013:1581.
2. Zhang H, et al. Expert Rev Proteomics 2010;7:103.
3. Gonzalez-Freire M, et al. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2017;8:5.
4. Baraibar MA, et al. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2012;2012:1.
5. Nielson CM, et al. J Bone Miner Res 2017;32:1559.
6. Hardy R, Cooper MS. J Endocrinol 2009;201:309.
7. Oh ES, et al. PLoS One 2018;13:e0204695.
8. Li F-X-Z, et al. Front Endocrinol 2020;11:77.
P233
THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN OSTEOPOROSIS AND
SARCOPENIA IN ALCOHOLIC LIVER CIRRHOSIS
I. Rogoveanu1, C. Ionele1, D. N. Florescu1, O. C. Rogoveanu1, B.
Ungureanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
S167
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Osteoporosis and sarcopenia are important complications of
alcoholic liver cirrhosis (ALC). The aim of this study was to evaluate the
relationship between osteoporosis and sarcopenia in patients with ALC.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated the correlation between
osteoporosis and sarcopenia in 112 patients with liver cirrhosis of various
etiologies (57 men, 55 women), by measuring the appendicular skeletal
muscle mass index (ASMI) using bio-impedance analysis. BMD was
measured by DXA osteodensitometry. Of these, 40 patients were
diagnosed with alcoholic liver cirrhosis (36%) while 72 patients had liver
cirrhosis of viral etiology.
Result: The rate of sarcopenia was 13% (14/112), while the rate of
osteoporosis and osteopenia was 17% (19/112) and 65% (73/112),
respectively. The rate of osteoporosis was significant and increased in
patients with sarcopenia and ALC. In the linear regression analysis,
sarcopenia was significantly associated with BMD of the lumbar spine
(coefficient=-0.149, P=0.014) and femoral neck (coefficient=-0.110,
P=0.003). ALC was also significantly associated with low BMD of the
lumbar spine (coefficient -0.160, P<0.001) and femoral neck
(coefficient=-0.066, P=0.015). In the logistic analysis, sarcopenia (odds
ratio=6.16, P=0.039) and cirrhosis (odds ratio=15.8, P=0.002) were
independent risk factors for osteoporosis. The IMSA limit values for
osteoporosis were 7.33 kg/m2 in men and 5.71 kg/m2 in women.
Conclusion: Sarcopenia has been closely associated with osteoporosis
and it has been observed that low ASMI could be a potential predictor of
osteoporosis in patients with chronic liver disease. Examination of BMD
may be needed to detect osteoporosis in patients with cirrhosis.
P234
EFFICIENCY OF INTRA-ARTICULAR TREATMENT ON PAIN
IN KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
O. C. Rogoveanu1, G. O. Cioroianu1, C. Gofita1, A. Musetescu1, R.
Traistaru1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Knee Osteoarthritis is a degenerative disease that occurs in
most of the population with age. It represents one of the main causes that
lead to disability worldwide.
Methods: We analyzed intra-articular treatment methods on a group of
46 patients aged between 60-80 y, diagnosed with knee osteoarthritis. 16
patients were treated with local analgesics and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs intra-articularly, 16 patients were treated with intra-
articular glucocorticoids and 14 patients were treated with intra-articular
hyaluronic acid.
Results: In patients treated with local analgesics and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs there was a decrease in pain for about 1 day, in those
treated with glucocorticoids the decrease in pain lasted about one month
while in patients treated with hyaluronic acid there was no immediate
decrease in pain for any of the patients, but the effect later obtained was
maintained for an average of 90 days.
Conclusion: Intra-articular treatment of knee osteoarthritis may reduce
local pain temporary or in the short-term, but it cannot stop the
progression of the intraarticular inflammatory process. The use of
analgesics or corticosteroids with local anti-inflammatory effect is
preferable in hyperalgesic forms but sustainable results are obtained by
injecting substances with protective effect on the articular cartilage.
P235
VITAMIN D LEVELS, BONE METABOLISM AND BONE MASS
IN PATIENTS WITH HEPATIC CIRRHOSIS OF ALCOHOLIC
ETIOLOGY
I. Rogoveanu1, C. Ionele1, A. E. Musetescu1, M. Sacerdotianu1, O. C.
Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Osteoporosis is observed in approximately 12-50% of the
patients with liver cirrhosis. The negative effects of alcohol are exerted
directly on bone cells and indirectly on hormones. Vitamin D is involved
in the differentiation of osteoblasts, bone matrix synthesis and bone
mineralization, as well as in its decomposition. Vitamin D deficiency
has been reported in approximately 2/3 of the patients with liver cirrhosis.
Our aim was the determination of vitamin D level, bone metabolic
activity and bone mass in patients with hepatic cirrhosis of alcoholic
etiology.
Methods: 30 male patients with liver cirrhosis of alcoholic etiology were
investigated between October 2019 and March 2020. Total vitamin D,
PTH and osteocalcin were determined by the ECLIA method
(electrochemiluminescence immunoassay) using the Elecsys 2010
analyzer. BMD was measured by osteodensitometry (DXA) using
Hologic Horizon A. The analysis of the results was performed using
descriptive statistics and hypothesis testing, as well as the nonparametric
analysis of the unidirectional variance and the Pearson correlation
coefficient.
Results: Vitamin D deficiency (<50 nmol/l) was observed in 66.66% of
patients, with a higher prevalence in Child-Pugh class C patients.
Osteocalcin levels were below the normal limit in 86.7% of patients.
CrossLaps was increased in only 20% of patients, but a significant
increase was observed in Child-Pugh Class C patients.
Conclusion: Vitamin D deficiency is present in most patients with liver
cirrhosis of alcoholic etiology. Osteoporosis is a common complication in
patients with chronic liver disease. The pathogenesis of osteoporosis is
mainly explained by low bone formation, although increased bone
resorption has also been reported, especially in women with advanced
cholestatic liver disease, due to vitamin D absorption deficiency.
P236
OSTEOPOROSIS IN CIRRHOTIC PATIENTS BEFORE AND
AFTER LIVER TRANSPLANTATION: THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN MALNUTRITION AND INFLAMMATORY
SYNDROME
I. Rogoveanu1, C. Ionele1, T. Sas1, A. Florescu1, O. C. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Liver cirrhosis is associated with osteoporosis and liver
transplantation (LT) with increased bone demineralization. This study
aimed to investigate the relationship between BMD and bone matrix
demineralization in transplant candidates with malnutrition, inflammatory
syndrome and altered levels of stress hormones.
Methods: We included 100 patients diagnosed with cirrhosis who
underwent LT between May 2019 and April 2020. BMD was assessed
by osteodensitometry (DXA). Malnutrition has been defined through
anthropometry and the assessment of recent weight loss. The hormone
TSH, free triiodothyronine (T3), free thyroxine (T4) and growth hormone
(GH), cortisol, free testosterone, estradiol, IL-6 and TNF were evaluated
in 75/100 patients. Overall, 57/100 patients received LT and 47/100 were
followed-up for one year after transplantation. At follow-up, nutritional
status and BMD were assessed in all the patients (n=47), while 34/47 had
blood samples available for analysis.
Results: Forty (40%) transplant candidates had osteopenia or
osteoporosis and 38 (38%) were malnourished. Malnutrition was
associated with osteopenia/osteoporosis (probability: 3.5, 95%CI 1.4,
9.9). The Z-score of the hip decreased by -0.25 (95%CI -0.41, -0.09) from
the initial time of assessment to one year after transplantation. Initially
high TNFα values correlated with a more pronounced decrease in BMD
(partial correlation (r)=-0.47, p<0.05) as well as high levels of initial
cortisol (r=-0.49, p<0.05).
Conclusion: Malnutrition in liver cirrhosis appears to be associated with
osteopenia/osteoporosis, systemic inflammation (elevated TNF) and
systemic stress (elevated plasma cortisol levels). LT improves the quality
S168
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
of life of these patients but can increase the bone demineralization process
in the medium term by increasing the release of stress hormones.
P237
OSTEOPOROSIS IN PATIENTS WITH HIP OSTEOARTHRITIS
WHO WILL UNDERGO TOTAL HIP ARTHROPLASTY
O. C. Rogoveanu1, R. Traistaru1, G. O. Cioroianu1, T. Sas1, D. Niculescu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Both osteoarthritis and osteoporosis are relatively common
diseases in women and their incidence increases with age. Total hip
arthroplasty is a surgical procedure whose number is expected to double
in the coming years.
Methods: In our study we included 43 patients, aged between 59-85 y,
who were waiting to undergo total hip arthroplasty. None of the women
were known to have been previously investigated for osteoporosis. We
evaluated the patients by DXA of the lumbar spine and of the proximal
femur bilateral.
Results: We found that 33% of patients had osteopenia, while 24% had
osteoporosis. These composed the study group. We also found that BMD
of the unaffected hip was lower than that of the hip awaiting surgery in
68% of cases. The other patients (43%), in which no changes of
osteoporosis or osteopenia were revealed by osteodensitometry
composed the control group. The analysis of the postoperative evolution
showed an increase in the duration of hospitalization and recovery time
for the patients from the study group compared to the control group.
Conclusion: Osteoporosis and osteoarthritis may be present at the same
time and may have a disabling effect on gait. Assessing the degree of
osteoporosis on the joint awaiting total hip arthroplasty is essential for the
postoperative evolution and early recovery of patients.
P238
PREVALENCE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF BONE DAMAGE
IN CIRRHOTIC PATIENTS BEING EVALUATED FOR LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION
I. Rogoveanu1, C. Ionele1, O. C. Rogoveanu1, B. Ungureanu1, D. A.
Horga2
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania,
2CHU Saint Eloi, Montpellier, France
Objective: We conducted a retrospective study to examine the
prevalence of bone disease among patients with cirrhosis who were
evaluated for liver transplantation.
Methods: We used dual energy bone osteodensitometry in the hip/
femoral neck and lumbar spine. The associations of bone diseases with
demographic and clinical data, disease etiology and liver function were
studied by logistic regression analyzes. Osteopenia and osteoporosis were
defined by the criteria of the WHO.
Results: We included in the study 66 patients (79% men, mean age of
53 y, range 21-69) of which 62.6% smokers and 23.7% diabetic
subjects. The mean BM) was 28 kg/m2. Liver disease was classified
as Child-Pugh class A (22%), B (51%) or C (27%); the mean score
for endstage liver disease (MELD) was 14.6. The etiology of the liver
disease was alcohol (49%), hepatitis C virus (32%), hepatitis B virus
(10%), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) (2.3%), secondary biliary
cirrhosis (2%) or of other causes (4.7%). In total, 50 patients (72%)
had bone diseases in the hip/femoral neck and/or in the lumbar spine:
overall hip damage, 26% (osteopenia, 22%; osteoporosis, 4%);
femoral neck, 48% (osteopenia, 43%; osteoporosis, 5%) and lumbar
spine, 63% (osteopenia, 40%; osteoporosis, 23%). By adjusting the
values of bone mineral density with age (Z-score) in relation to that
defined by the T-score, we observed a decrease in the prevalence of
bone diseases both in the femoral neck (20% compared to 48%) and
in the lumbar spine (44% vs. 63%).
Conclusion: Bone damage, especially in the lumbar spine, is common in
patients with cirrhosis who are being evaluated for liver transplantation.
Cirrhosis is a major risk factor for bone disease that remains even when
bone density values are adjusted by age. Female gender, lower BMI and
tobacco use are major risk factors for bone disease in patients with
cirrhosis. Bone osteodensitometry should be included in the assessment
of liver transplantation in all patients.
P239
C O M P A R A T I V E S T U D Y O F T H E E F F E C T S O F
CORTICOSTEROID THERAPY VS. BIOLOGICAL AGENTS
O N B O N E M E T A B O L I S M I N P A T I E N T S W I T H
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
O. C. Rogoveanu1, G. O. Cioroianu1, C. Geormaneanu1, A. Florescu1, A.
E. Musetescu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: The use of glucocorticoids in the long-term treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis may cause possible side effects, including among
others, the loss of BMD.
Methods: We studied the effects of the treatments used in rheumatoid
arthritis on 32 patients, all women aged between 57-68 y, in the
postmenopausal period. Half of the patients were treated with high-dose
glucocorticoids (40 mg/gc), while the other 16 patients were given a
combination of 10-15 mg/Kgc glucocorticoids and biological agents for
the next 6 months.
Results: Following the 6 months of treatment, the patients were evaluated
by DXA of the lumbar spine. The mean T-score for the patients treated
with glucocorticoids alone was -2.3, with a maximum value of -2.8 and a
minimum value of -2; while the mean T-score for patients treated with
both glucocorticoids and biological agents was -2 with a maximum value
of -2.4 and a minimum value of -1.4.
Conclusion: A lower dose of glucocorticoids in combination with
biologic therapy correlates with a lower risk of osteoporosis and its
complications.
P240
NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH OSTEOPENIA OR
OSTEOPOROSIS
O. C. Rogoveanu1, G. O. Cioroianu1, C. Geormaneanu1, T. Sas1, C.
Gofita1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: In women aged between 40-79, the prevention of osteoporosis
and its complications represents a goal of the highest importance.
Lifestyle and diet can have a positive or negative effect on the disease.
Methods: 23 postmenopausal women with ages between 53-71 y were
included in the study. Each patient was assessed by DXA of the lumbar
spine. The results showed the lowest T-score of -2.9 and the highest T-
score of -1.4 with a mean T-score of -2.1. After the evaluation, the patients
were prescribed vitamin D supplements, and their diet was changed so that
it contained an increased amount of calcium. The patients were also
inducted in a 3 times/week physical exercise class. In addition, the patients
were advised to maintain an ideal body weight, to quit smoking and, if
necessary, to reduce alcohol intake. A control group was also composed,
consisting of 23 patients age- and sex-matched with the study group in
which osteoporosis was treated only with medication and dietary
supplements, without physical treatment.
S169
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: After 3 months, the patients were reevaluated by DXA of the
spine. It was found that the lowest T-score was now -2.8, while the highest
T-score was now -1.2 with a mean T-score of -2 in the study group,
compared to the control group in which the mean T-score found was -2.2.
Conclusion: Dietary control and lifestyle in postmenopausal women can
reduce the risk of fractures, help treat osteoporosis, or may even help in
preventing its onset. The association of physical exercise improves the T
score and helps increase the quality of life of these patients.
P241
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA – MORE OFTEN THAN BELIEVED: A
SINGLE LABORATORY DATABASE 15 YEARS RESULTS
FROM LATVIA
D. Pokšāne1, I. Rasa2
1Rīga Stradiņš University; Latvian Osteoporosis & Bone Metabolic
Diseases Association, 2Rīga Stradiņš University; Riga East Clinical
University Hospital; Latvian Osteoporosis & Bone Metabolic Diseases
Association, Riga, Latvia
Objective: A database analysis was conducted to assess phosphorus
serum level status among adults in Latvia from E. Gulbja lab electronic
database over the past 15 y. Hypophosphatemia may be the reason for
different hypophosphatemic syndr.
Methods: Pts with hypophosphatemia in the E. Gulbja lab database
retrospectively from January 2004 to December 2020 were identified.
All hypophosphatemia levels (the reference range 0.80-1.60 mmol/L)
was divided into 3 groups (Felsenfeld A et al., 2012) depending on serum
phosphorus level – mild hypophosphatemia (0.81-0.65 mmol/L), moderate
(0.65-0.32 mmol/L) and severe (<0.32 mmol/L). Also, serum calcium (Ca)
(the reference range 2.1-2.6 mmol/L), vitamin D (30-100 ng/mL) and iPTH
(12-72 pg/mL) were analyzed.
Results: A total of 3173 serum phosphorus samples were analyzed –
1760 females and 1413 males. Pts were, on average, 60.2±14.9SD yrs
old. The average age of females – 60.4±15.0 SD yrs and males – 60.0
±14.8 SD. The number of blood samples with reduced (<0.80 mmol/L)
serum phosphorus level was 1803 (56.8%), were mild hypophosphatemia
was 1414 (78.4%) were 767 females (54.2%), and 647 males (45.8%)
with an average age was 60.0±14.7 SD yrs. Moderate hypophosphatemia
were 381 (21.1%) were 206 females (54.1%), and 175 males (45.9%)
with an average age was 56.6±15.7 SD yrs. Severe hypophosphatemia
was 8 pts (0.5%) – 5 females, 3 males with the average age 56.1±16.4 SD
yrs. A total of 1719 (95.3%) serum Ca levels were analyzed, where
decreased were 84 (4.9%) and increased were 490 (28.5%). A total of
972 (53.9%) serum iPTH levels were analyzed for pts with
hypophosphatemia, where decreases were 4 (0.4%) and increased were
610 (62.8%). A total of 456 (25.3%) serum vitamin D levels were
analyzed in pts with hypophosphatemia, were decreased (<30 ng/mL)
were 104 (22.8%) and increased (>10 0ng/mL) were 21 (4.6%).
Conclusion: Hypophosphatemia is more often than commonly believed.
It needs to be examined for various reasons, e.g., hyperparathyroidism,
vitamin D deficiency, hypophosphatemic syndr.: vitamin D-dependent
rickets type 1-3, X-linked hypophosphatemia, gastrointestinal disorders.
These data may facilitate research within all areas of genetic disorders of
hypophosphatemia.
P242
MINERAL BONE DENSITY, TRABECULAR BONE SCORE
AND FRAX® IN PEOPLE WITH DIABETES MELLITUS
E. Mazurenko1, O. Rymar1, L. Shcherbakova1, M. Bobak2, S. Malyutina1
1Research Institute of Internal & Preventive Medicine – Branch of the
Institute of Cytology & Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy
of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia, 2University College London, London,
UK
Objective: To study indicators of BMD and trabecular bone score (TBS)
and to reveal the 10-y fracture risk (FRAX) taking into account the data
obtained in persons with type 2 diabetes (DM2).
Methods: A clinical study of the type of case-control. The study included
122 people (19 men, 103 women) aged 45-69 y with and without DM2
(among women, only postmenopausal women were included). In the
subgroup of people with DM2 were 64 (32 indicated a history of
osteoporotic fracture (OF), 32 without a fracture), without diabetes were
58 (29 with OF, 29 without OF). All persons had questionnaire
assessment of fracture factors on the FRAX score, anthropometry,
DXA, determination of TBS and fracture risk on the FRAX. Statistical
data processing using the SPSS program (v.13.0).
Results: Persons with DM2 who underwent a fracture had lower T-score
values in the femoral neck on the right and left (p=0.047), unlike those
with DM2, but without fracture.
However, persons with DM2 had a fracture at high values of T-score in
vertebrae and hips in comparison with persons without DM. Using the
TBS, we did not get a significant difference in any of the examined
groups. The values of FRAX by T-score in the group of persons with
DM with fractures were significantly lower (p=0.029 for major fractures,
p=0.024 for hip fractures) than in persons without DM with fractures.
Among women with DM2 and OF, the FRAX adjusted for TBS was
significantly lower for major fractures (p=0.010) than FRAX calculated
without DXA. We also found no differences in the risk of recurrent
fractures among women with and without DM2 using FRAX without
densitometry (p=0.094 for major fractures, p=0.058 for the hip) and
FRAX adjusted for TBS.
Conclusion: The structure of the bone in diabetes remains unknown.
There are conflicting data on the risk of fractures in people with DM2.
Peoples with DM2 and fractures have higher BMD values, lower fracture
risk according to FRAX corrected for the T-score, have no TBS value,
which determines the complexity of diagnosis, search for additional
methods for early diagnosis of an increased risk of fractures in patients
with DM2.
Acknowledgement: The study was supported by RSF №20-15-00371;
State target №АААА-А17-117112850280-2
P243
THE RISK OF OSTEOPOROTIC FOREARM FRACTURES IN
SUBJECTS WITH DIABETES AND WITHOUT DIABETES IN
THE SIBERIAN POPULATION
E. Mazurenko1, S. Malyutina1, L. Shcherbakova1, O. Rymar1
1Research Institute of Internal & Preventive Medicine – Branch of the
Institute of Cytology & Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy
of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia
Objective: An unexpected finding in the general structure of fractures in
the Russian Federation was a higher frequency of the forearm fractures
compared with other countries. The attention to the forearm fractures, as
to osteoporotic fractures (OF), is important for ensuring early detection of
individuals at increased risk of future fractures and taking preventive
measures. This study aimed to study the frequency of the history of
forearm fractures (FF) and their risk factors in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus (DM2) and without diabetes aged over 50 y.
Methods: The cross-sectional study was based on a population cohort
(the HAPIEE Project, Novosibirsk) examined at baseline in 2015-2017,
in Novosibirsk, n=3878 men and women aged 58-84 y. The study
included people who signed the informed consent to conduct the study,
excluded individuals who wrote a waiver of taking blood to determine
biochemical parameters. In total, the analysis included n=3393 people,
718 of them with DM2 (21.2%). The information was collected on OF
over the past 3 y, the registration of sociodemographic data; and risk
factors for OF, a study of biochemical blood parameters. The analysis
of the association of DM2 and a complex of risk factors with a chance of a
S170
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
FF was performed. DM was defined by fasting blood glucose ≥7.0
mmol/l (WHO, 1999) and/or history of treated DM. Statistical analysis
was carried out by SPSS package (v.13.0).
Results: Among 3393 subjects there were 1388 men and 2005 women.
The prevalence of FF in the last 3 y did not differ in patients with DM2
compared with those examined without diabetes and was 2.4% and 2.8%,
respectively (p=0.557). Men with OF had higher cholesterol and HDL
values, women had lower BMI compared with people without fractures.
According to the results of a multivariate analysis in women, the chance
of a FF is directly associated with smoking in the past, a total cholesterol
level of more than 200 mg/dl and inversely associated with a BMI. In
men, associations were found of the chance of a FF with an increase in the
level of cholesterol. There was no evidence of DM2 with FF.
Conclusion: The associations were found between risk factors, such as
smoking, hypercholesterolemia and BMI with the FF. The obtained data
on the incidence of fractures and their association with risk factors
indicate the need for preventive measures for OF, both in people with
and without DM2.
Acknowledgement: The study was supported by WT081081AIA, State
target №АААА-А17-117112850280-2.
P244
BODY COMPOSITION OF LONG-LIVING PATIENTS WITH
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
S. V. Topolyanskaya1, T. A. Eliseeva2, N. A. Balyasnikova2, O. N.
Vakulenko2, L. I. Dvoretski1
1First Moscow State Medical University, 2War Veterans Hospital N3,
Moscow, Russia
Objective: Very limited data are available on body composition of long-
living patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), therefore, we
evaluated body composition of long-living patients with CAD.
Methods: 200 hospitalized patients with CAD (females 69.3%, males
30.7%) aged 90-106 y were enrolled in this cross-sectional study. Body
composition was assessed by DXA.
Results: 70.3% of patients were overweight or obese. Obesity was
observed in 30.2% of patients; in 93.5% of them it was 1st degree obesity,
2nd degree was only in 6.5%, and 3rd degree was never met. The body
weight deficit was found in only one patient (0.49%). Mean BMI was
27.6 (18.2-38.8) kg/m2. Women had more fat mass then men: total fat
39.8% vs. 30.0% (p<0.0001), lower extremities fat 42.4% vs. 27.4%
(p<0.0001). Mean total mass of lean tissue in women was 38.4 kg, and
in men 48.8 kg (p<0.000001). The musculoskeletal index remained
within the normal range in 77.2% and was below normal in 22.8% of
patients. A decrease in the musculoskeletal index was observed in 22.9%
of men and 19.1% of women (p=0.5). The mean total T-score was -1.75
SD. Decrease of total BMD (T-score) ≤-2.5 SD was detected in 40%,
and normal total T-score in 30.7% of patients. The greatest BMD was
recorded in lumbar spine (1005.6+190.6 mg/cm3), the lowest BMD in
ribs (626.2+83.9 mg/cm3). As expected, female patients had lower BMD
in all parts of the body (p<0.0001). A significant positive correlation was
found between BMD and the fat mass in all parts of the body (r=0.6;
p<0.000001). A positive correlation was found between the lean mass
and BMD (r=0.64; p<0.000001). A negative correlation was found
between the fat and lean mass, in particular, in lower extremities (r=-
0.47; p<0.000001). Muscle strength (according to dynamometry data)
positively correlated with lean tissue content (r=0.55; p<0.000001). The
content of lean tissue was positively correlated with the distance covered
in the 6-min walk test (p=0.007).
Conclusion: Study results demonstrated some features of body
composition in patients with CAD aged 90 years or older. The proportion
of overweight patients with normal indices of BMD and lean mass was
relatively high. Significant relationships between the bone, adipose and
lean tissues were demonstrated.
P245
BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND METABOLISM IN VERY
ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH CONGESTIVE HEART
FAILURE
S. V. Topolyanskaya1, L. S. Lifanova1, T. A. Eliseeva2, O. N.
Vakulenko2, L. I. Dvoretski1
1First Moscow State Medical University, 2War Veterans Hospital N3,
Moscow, Russia
Objective: There are few data available on the relationship of heart
failure and osteoporosis among very elderly patients, therefore we
investigated BMD and metabolism in very elderly patients with heart
failure.
Methods: The study enrolled 125 patients (38 men, 87 women, aged 75-98
y) hospitalized with coronary artery disease (CAD). Study group
comprised 61 patients with clinically significant CHF (NYHA FC III-
IV), control group 64 CAD patients without CHF symptoms. Main
exclusion criteria were any other diseases that could cause osteoporosis
and administration of medications reducing BMD. Lumbar spine and
proximal femur BMD was measured by DXA. Fracture risk was measured
under FRAX model, and osteoporosis standard risk factors were analyzed.
Osteocalcin concentration in the blood serum was measured by
immunochemiluminescent method, and β-CrossLaps level (degradation
products of collagen type I) by electrochemiluminescence.
Results: BMD in the CHF patients was lower (both in absolute
values and by the T-score) vs. the control group (age-matched
patients with similar main disease of CAD). Largest differences were
recorded in proximal femur: BMD in the CHF patients was 719.8
±188.2 mg/cm3 vs. 797.7±161.7 mg/cm3 (p=0.02) in the control
group. Greater differences in BMD were detected in female patients
(p=0.007). Femoral neck BMD in the CHF patients was 649.4±137.1
mg/cm3 vs. 696.2±121.8 mg/cm3 (p=0.03) in the control group.
There were no significant differences found in lumbar vertebrae
BMD between the groups (p=0.4). Proximal femur BMD had normal
values only in 5% of the CHF patients, whilst normal BMD values in
the control group were in 31% of cases (p=0.003). A similar trend
was found for lumbar spine BMD, but these group differences did not
achieve statistical significance (p=0.11). CHF impact on BMD was
also confirmed during multiple regression analysis. It found that
ultimate significant factors determining proximal femur BMD were
CHF (β=-0.375, p=0.005) and female sex (β=0.698, p<0.0001).
Reduced osteoblast function was observed in CHF patients: the mean
osteocalcin level in the CHF patients was 1.2±1.7 ng/ml vs. 4.2±4.1
ng/ml (р=0.03) in the control group. In 60.6% of the CHF patients,
osteocalcin concentration was below the lower limit of normal
(p=0.02 vs. control). Also, mean β-CrossLaps level in the CHF
patients reached 0.73±0.4 ng/ml vs. 0.4±0.1 ng/ml (p=0.003) in the
control group. β-CrossLaps level was increased in 21.7% of the CHF
patients, but no one had high β-CrossLaps values in the control
group (p=0.03). There was negative correlation between β-
CrossLaps concentration and BMD, especially in the proximal femur
(r=-0.4, p=0.03). Negative correlation was found between TNFα
level with its serum concentration higher in the CHF patients
(p=0.04) and BMD, especially in the proximal femur (r=-0.9,
p=0.03). In patients with decreased leptin concentration (found only
in the CHF patients), BMD values were lower than in those with
normal or increased serum leptin concentration (p=0.006 for the
proximal femur).
Conclusion: These study findings suggest that BMD in very elderly CHF
patients is noticeably lower vs. the patient group similar in age and main
diseases. This study has demonstrated significantly reduced osteoblast
function in CHF patients and slight increase in bone resorption. Further
studies of bone tissue condition in CHF patients with large patient sample
and research into mechanisms of relationship between osteoporosis and
heart failure are reasonable.
S171
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P246
INCREASING THE DETECTION OF VERTEBRAL
FRACTURES (VFS) USING AI ON CT PERFORMED FOR ALL
CLINICAL INDICATIONS
R. Gordon1, B. Gordon2, K. White2, H. Lebel1, E. Spitz1, E. Blumenfeld1
1Zebra Medical Vision, Shefayim, Israel, 2Intermountain Healthcare,
Utah, USA
Objective: Despite their prognostic value, reporting of vertebral fractures
(VFs) on routine imaging is commonly low. We report on the diagnostic
accuracy and potential for clinical impact of software which detects VFs.
Methods: A convolutional neural network based VF detection tool was
generated utilizing a training set of 1832 Computed tomography (CT)
scans including compression fractures indexed according to the Genant
classification as mild, moderate, and severe. Ground truth was established
by three expert radiologists. Validation was performed on a novel dataset
of 611 CT scans of the chest and abdomen/pelvis. To assess the potential
for clinical impact, the software was applied to 76,069 anonymized CTs
acquired from a USA based integrated health delivery system comprising
24 hospitals and 7 clinics. The threshold for a positive result was set at the
presence of at least one moderate VF. Each corresponding CT report was
evaluated by a combination of human and natural language processing for
the reporting of vertebral compression fracture. 290 studies were
randomly selected and reviewed by two expert radiologists to verify
consistent algorithmic accuracy in this data set.
Results: On the validation dataset of 611 examinations, the software
achieved an overall AUC of 0.95 with sensitivity 90.6% and specificity
of 86.6% for the detection of VFs. VFs were noted in 4996 (6.6%) of
76,069 radiology reports; of these, 3167 were also detected
algorithmically. VFs were detected by the software in a total of 11,890
(15.6%) CT examinations. Of the 290 CTs analyzed for consistent
accuracy, results achieved a negative predictive value of 90.7% and
positive predictive value of 58.2%. Of the 94 false positive cases, 72
(76.6%) comprised studies with mild compression fractures.
Conclusion: An automatic VF detection tool with high diagnostic
accuracy demonstrates potential to substantially improve the current
reporting gap for vertebral compression fractures, increasing the detected
moderate-severe VFs by 138%.
Clinical relevance/application: Vertebral fractures are commonly
underreported. A tool to increase reporting of vertebral fractures can
potentially increase preventative interventions for subsequent major
osteoporotic fractures.
P247
VITAMIN D STATUS IN BREAST CANCER PATIENTS UNDER
HORMONE THERAPY
K. Nassar1, R. Assadi2, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., Hassan II
University of Medicine & Pharmacy., 2Dept. of Rheumatology, Ibn
Rochd University Hospital Center, Hassan II University, Faculty of
Medicine & Pharmacy. Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Hormone therapy, particularly aromatase inhibitors, are the
cause of a decrease of estrogens and their use is correlated with an
increased risk of bone loss and fractures when they are used between 2-
5 y. 25 (OH) vitamin D around 30 ng/ml is needed to prevent reactive
hyperparathyroidism, bone loss and the resulting osteoporotic fractures.
Some studies also seem to show a protective effect of vitamin D against
breast and colorectal cancer. The purpose of this study is to assess the
vitamin D status in patients followed for breast cancer and receiving
hormone therapy, especially those under aromatase inhibitors.
Methods: Transversal and descriptive monocentric study conducted in
the rheumatology department at Ibn Rochd University Hospital, in bone
diseases unit. The patients included are those who are followed in
oncology for breast cancer under hormone therapy and referred to
rheumatology for an evaluation of the bone loss. Those who were under
other anti-cancer treatments were excluded. All patients underwent a
complete phospho-calcic and vitamin D explorations. Those with low
vitamin D have received supplementation prior to performing a DXA.
We included demographic data, those related to neoplastic disease, then
the results of blood and urinary explorations. Vitamin D deficiency was
defined by a 25 (OH) D level <10 ng/ml and an insufficiency when it was
between 10-30 ng/ml.
Results: 188 patients under hormone therapy were recruited, 160 of
whom were using aromatase inhibitors and only 28 on tamoxifen. The
average age was 54.3 years old. The majority were postmenopausal
(98%). The long-term use of corticosteroids we the only other risk factor
for bone loss, noted in 13% of cases. 87% of patients had low vitamin D at
the time of the consultation; 70% were in deficient. The mean value of
vitamin D was at 19.35 ng/ml. The mean serum calcium was at 90.82 mg/
l, mean calciuria was at 100.5 mg/24 h, mean serum phosphate was at
42.57 mg/l and PTH at 70.6 pg/ml (Table). The lack of vitamin D had
been corrected. Treatment with bisphosphonates was associated with it
for those with osteoporosis (T-Score <-2 SD).
Conclusion: A very large percentage of patients starting adjuvant
aromatase inhibitors therapy have severe vitamin D insufficiency compared
to women of the same age. Our results join those of the literature. This
vitamin D insufficiency or deficiency are reversible, and studies are
underway to analyze the effect of such substitution on bone loss and
fracture risk in these patients under aromatase inhibitors. Several recent
studies tend to show the potential role of low vitamin D levels in terms of
increased risk of recurrence and death from breast cancer. For all these
reasons, the evaluation of vitamin D and its supplementation are necessary
and important in women with breast cancer treated with antiestrogens.
Table. Characteristics of the population and the results of vitamin D and
phospho-calcic explorations
Patients under hormone therapy (HTT)
188 (94%)
Types of hormone therapy
Aromatase inhibitors
160 (85%)
Tamoxifen
28 (15%)
Patients mean age
54.3 y
Average age of breast cancer diagnosis
56.12 y
Menopausal patients
184 (98%)
Secondary menopause linked to HTT
38%
Others risk factors of bone loss justifying specialized monitoring
Long term use of corticosteroids
13%
Metastatic cancer
15.18%
Patients with low vitamin D :
*vitamin D deficiency (<10 ng/ml )
164 (87%) 115 (70%)
*vitamin D insufficiency (10-30 ng/ml)
49 (30%)
Mean value of 25(OH)vitamin D
19.35 ng/ml
Mean calcemia
90.82 mg/l
Mean calciuria
100.5 mg/24-h
Mean serum phosphate
42.57 mg/l
Mean PTH
70.6 pg/ml
P248
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF MYOTONIC AND
MYOFASCIAL SYNDROMES OF NECK PAIN
A. Filipovich1
1National Science and Practice Centre of Medical Assessment &
Rehabilitation, Yukhnovka, Belarus
S172
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: The dynamic monitoring of 195 patients with myotonic and
myofacial syndromes of neck pain was done against the control group of
45 people.
Methods: MRI of cervical and vertebrocranial areas of spinal column,
electromyography of 7-9 relevant muscles, finding of the “key” muscle
and the overall computer aided assessment of osteomuscular,
cardiorespiratory and oxygen transport system disorders.
Results: Clinical and electromyographic criteria for diagnosis of
myotonic and myofascial syndromes of neck pain were identified based
on the occurrence rates. The role of major system disorders in
pathogenesis of neurological manifests of neck pain was studied. New
therapeutic approaches to stopping pain and myotonic syndromes were
developed; the effectiveness of early rehabilitation measures was
demonstrated. The prevailing myotonic syndromes were identified which
were the musculus obliquus capitis inferior syndrome (in 68, or 39.4%
patients); superscapular area syndrome (33% of patients); musculus
scalenus anterior and musculus scalenus medius syndromes (18.9%);
musculus pectoralis minor syndrome (9.7%). Hypodynamia caused
system disorders were noted in 78.3% patients including excessive body
mass and fat content; reduced blood circulation rate and heartbeat volume
and the pronounced decrease of PWC170. The most informative
spondylographic findings were reduced thickness of posterior areas of
intervertebral disks from CI to CVII (52.3 to 77.9% of patients), cervical
lordosis impression (76.4%) and uncovertebral arthroses (58.2%).
Conclusion: The most seriously affected (“key”) muscles in neck pain
patients were found. Diagnosis and treatment strategies for neck pain
patients were developed.
P249
SOME TECHNICAL MEANS OF REHABILITATION FOR
PATIENTS WITH LOW BACK PAIN
A. Filipovich1
1National Science and Practice Centre of Medical Assessment &
Rehabilitation, Yukhnovka, Belarus
Objective: 78 patients with myotonic (МТ) syndrome.
Methods: Patients went through the clinical estimation of neurologic
status, manual testing of muscles, CT and MRI of back bone lumbar
department, interferential and needle electromyography of the most
damaged muscular groups, dosed loading veloergometry, revasography
of feet, and shins.
Results: Medical rehabilitation complex on damaged extremity was
approbated in 27 patients with MT syndrome. The complex included oral
reception of katadolon (100 mg 3 times a day for 10 days), tractions on
Fintrac-471 table (with force from 3-55 kg, a course of 8-10 sessions) and
also acupuncture with use acupuncture points of general action with
vascular autonomic nervous system orientation (G14, MJ6, E36, RP6,
TR5, V40) and locally segmented points on the most damaged muscular
groups (АТ60, VB30 with deep introduction to piriform muscle; VB 34,
VB41, F3).
Conclusion: After treatment damaged extremity pain has completely
disappeared in 19 patients, pain essentially decreased and increased
tolerance of physical activity in 6 patients. It is established that katadolon
shows not only analgesic and neuroprotective, but also myorelaxing
action on muscles of pelvic girdle and feet in patients with acute and
chronic pain syndrome.
P250
CLINICAL AND IMMUNOLOGICAL DISORDERS IN
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS PATIENTS WITH THE PRESENCE
OF FOOD ALLERGY
A. Filipovich1
1National Science and Practice Centre of Medical Assessment &
Rehabilitation, Yukhnovka, Belarus
Objective: 102 multiple sclerosis patients 19-33 years old were examined
against the control group of 20 healthy people.
Methods: MRI and immunological studies.
Results: All patients on the level of IgE in blood serum of 20 basic food
products are divided into four groups: the first (13 pers, 12.7%) with the
absence of IgE in serum, second (29 pers, 28.5% ) with the presence of
IgE (threshold 0.35-0.69 IU/ml); third (45 pers, 44.1%) with a moderate
increase in IgE (0.70-3.49 IU/ml); fourth (15 pers, 14.7%) with a
significant increase in IgE (3.50-17.49 IU/ml) in serum. Patients first
group without clinical signs of apparent exacerbation of MS were
observed in blood eosinophilia, and the brain MRI revealed hyperintense
foci in a single T-2W mode, indicating the absence of active
demyelinating process. Patients with the second group with a slow
chronic course of MS were determined by individual eosinophils
(18.1%), indicating that they have a weak allergic reaction.
Identification of individual hypo- and hyperintense lesions on brain
MRI evidence of chronic course of demyelinating process in the presence
of rare clinical exacerbations was seen by us as secondary progressive
MS. In the third group investigated the apparent worsening of the process
of clinical signs detected a moderate increase in serum IgE (45 pers,
44.1%) in the presence of explicit eosinophilia (11.8%).
Conclusion: Markers of exacerbation of MS is the simultaneous
moderate increase in serum IgE eosinophilia, and the appearance of
new lesions on MRI gipointensivnyh brain.
P251
THE LONG TERM RESULTS OF TREATMENT AND
REHABILITATION OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS PATIENTS
A. Filipovich1
1National Science and Practice Centre of Medical Assessment &
Rehabilitation, Yukhnovka, Belarus
Objective: Long term results of treatment of multiple sclerosis were
studied.
Methods: The dynamic monitoring of 110 patients over the period of 1-
1.5 y following the successful in-hospital treatment of MS was carried
out. Clinical methods, CT and MRI of cerebrum and spinal cord, and a
patented radioimmunobiological assay of the myelinotoxic activity
(MTA) of blood serum were used.
Results: Four groups of patients were distinguished: group 1 (36 patients;
32.7%) had patients with low MTA level (4.56*0.7 units) after successful
hormone therapy. No rehabilitation was required out afterwards. Group 2
included 41 patients (37.3%) with low MTA level (3.76*0.81) after
hormone and corrector therapy; a rehabilitation course was carried out
at a later stage. Group 3 consisted of 22 patients (20.0%) that required
long term immunomodulating therapy due to a higher rate of
demyelinisation (MTA=19.2*0.43). The remaining 11 patients (group
4, 10.0%) with moderate rate of demyelinisation (16.4*0.52) were
prescribed general health improvement therapy and rehabilitation based
on intensive motional activity and physical exercise.
Conclusion: Hormone therapy helps to reduce the demyelinisation rate to
acceptable level within 2-4 months. The subsequent rehabilitation helps
to achieve the extended remission period. However, long time after
treatment of acute MS the hormone therapy is not justified.
P252
USE OF MRI AND MTA ASSAY OF BLOOD SERUM FOR
DIAGNOSIS OF INITIAL PHASE OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
A. Filipovich1
S173
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1National Science and Practice Centre of Medical Assessment &
Rehabilitation, Yukhnovka, Belarus
Methods: MRI of cerebrum and spinal cord and a patented method for
measuring the myelinotoxic activity (MTA) of blood serum and spinal
fluid were used. 75 initial MS patients 16-35 years old were examined.
Results: Monosymptomatic start of MS was found in 46 (61.3%) patients,
and polysymptomatic MS in 29 (38.7%) patients. MRI of cerebrum and
spinal cord revealed focal points of decreasing T-1W / increasing T-2W
signal in 50 (70.7%) of examined patients. Therefore, the diagnostic
importance of MRI of cerebrum and spinal fluid at the initial phase of
MS is not very high. Two groups of patients were distinguished on the
basis of MTA measurements. Group 1 included 46 monosymptomatic
patients with slightly increased MTA of blood serum (9.8±1.3 units
compared to 3.9±0.82 in control group) and spinal fluid (11.2±1.2 units
compared to 5.9±1.4 in control group). Group 2 consisted of patients with
polysymptomatic course of MS. Clear increase in MTA level (18.9±0.92
for blood serum and 23.4±0.7 for spinal fluid) compared to both control
group and group 1 was noted.
Conclusion: The diagnostic importance of MRI of cerebrum is not high
at the initial stage of MS. However, MRI in combination with MTA assay
of blood serum greatly helps to reveal the initial MS in vast majority of
cases.
P253
CANDIDA PERIPROSTHETIC JOINT INFECTION:
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ALBICANS AND
NON-ALBICANS GROUP
D. Karczewski1, D. Akguen1, O. Andronic2, C. Perka1, M. Müller1, A.
Kienzle1
1Charité University Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Balgrist
University Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Objectives: Approximately 1% of all periprosthetic joint infections (PJI)
are caused by fungal microorganisms. Previous systematic analyses have
focused on the impact of treatment rather than the role of the causative
fungal agent itself, and there is lack of knowledge on Candida strain-
dependent patient characteristics and clinical outcome. For that reason,
it was the goal of the present study to compare Candida albicans and non-
albicans PJI concerning patient characteristics, diagnosis, treatment and
outcome.
Methods: Inclusion criteria were: (1) Candida PJI, (2) of a THA or TKA,
(3) treated in our department between the years 2010-2018. All patients
were regularly invited to our specialized outpatient clinic for follow-up
examinations after treatment (6-12 weeks postoperatively and thereafter
half-annually). In addition, all included patients were prospectively
followed up at the end of the present study. A PJI was defined according
to IDSA, a reinfection according to the modified Delphi Consensus
criteria. Statistical analysis was performed using t-test, chi-square test
with Yates correction, and log rank test for reinfection rate.
Results: Besides age and the affected joint, no significant differences
were found between albicans and non-albicans strains. However, the
reinfection rate was significantly higher in patients with Candida albicans
PJI compared to non-albicans Candida PJI (Table).
Conclusion: To the authors best knowledge, this is the first study to
compare albicans to non-albicans Candida PJI. While age and affected
joint might play a confounding role, we speculate the causative Candida
sub strain to play a decisive role in disease progression.
Table. PJI characteristics
Candia albicans
PJI
non-albicans
Candida PJI
p
Count [n]
17
12
-
Gender distribution [n]
5 males;
12 females
8 males;
4 females
0.108
Age [y]
75.83±7.29
64.11±15.71
0.012
Follow-up time [months]
26.70±33.48
42.01±30.95
0.223
Affected joint [n]
hip: 12;
knee: 5
hip: 2;
knee: 10
0.013
CCI
5.88±2.00
4.67±2.10
0.126
CRP [mg/L]
66.85±72.53
30.33±28.88
0.111
Additional bacterial
infection [%] (n)
76.47% (13)
75.00% (9)
-
Reinfection [%] (n)
52.9% (9)
16.6% (2)
0.044
P254
INTRAVENOUS ZOLEDRONATE FOR POSTMENOPAUSAL
OSTEOPOROSIS: SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND META-
ANALYSIS
F. Gazoni1, V. Civile1, F. Santos1, B. Albergaria2, B. Andriolo1, A.
Atallah1, V. Trevisani1
1Sao Paulo Federal University, Sao Paulo, 2Espirito Santo Federal
University, Vitoria, Brazil
Objective: Osteoporosis compromises bone strength and increases
fracture risk. Fractures are responsible for high morbidity leading to
low quality of life and high mortality. Zoledronate inhibits the activity
of osteoclasts, preventing loss of bone mass and reducing risk of fractures.
This study aimed to determine the efficacy and safety of zoledronate
therapy for preventing and treating postmenopausal osteoporosis.
Methods: We searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, LILACS, four
trial registers, two conference abstract books and the bibliographies of
included studies until May 2020. Selection criteria: We included all
randomised controlled trials (at least one year long) comparing
zoledronate with placebo or other bisphosphonates in postmenopausal
women. Data collection and analysis: We used standard methodological
procedures expected by Cochrane reviews. Two review authors
independently assessed risk of bias and extracted data about efficacy
and safety.
Results: We included in this review 13 trials with 12,871 participants.
Nine trials accounted for 10,068 osteoporotic women (5 studies compared
zoledronate with placebo; one investigated different doses and
frequencies of zoledronate vs. placebo; 2 compared zoledronate with
alendronate; and one assessed zoledronate vs. ibandronate). Four trials
accounted for 2803 osteopenic women (2 studies compared different
doses and frequencies of zoledronate with placebo; and other 2 assessed
different frequencies of zoledronate vs. placebo, with a long follow-up
period). Trials size varied from 50-7765 participants. Participants mean
age ranged from 54-73 y. We rated seven studies at unclear or high risk of
bias for at least 2 domains, and 4 at low risk of bias for all domains. The
most common sources of bias were no description of random sequence
generation and allocation concealment, and lack of blinding of
participants and personnel. Based on one study comparing zoledronate
5 mg yearly with placebo for osteoporotic women during a 3-y period: the
rate of morphometric vertebral fracture is 33 women per 1000 in the
zoledronate group (range 26-41) and 109/1000 in the control group
(absolute difference of 7.6% fewer events (8.3% fewer to 6.8% fewer)
(high certainty evidence)); the rate of nonvertebral fracture is 79 women
per 1000 in the zoledronate group (range 68-94) compared with 106/1000
in the control group (absolute difference of 2.6% fewer events (3.8%
fewer to 1.2% fewer) (moderate certainty evidence; downgraded for
imprecision)); the rate of hip fracture is 14 women per 1000 in the
zoledronate group (range 10- 20) and 23/1000 in the control group
(absolute difference of 0.9% fewer events (1.3% fewer to 0.3% fewer)
(moderate-certainty evidence; downgraded for imprecision)); the rate of
S174
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
cardiovascular event is 57 women per 1000 in the zoledronate group
(range 47-68) and 53/1000 in the control group (absolute difference of
0.3% more events (0.6% fewer to 1.5% more) (moderate certainty
evidence; downgraded for imprecision)); the mean percentage difference
in CTX is 63.16% lower (51.44% lower to 74.88% lower) with
zoledronate and 13.99% higher with placebo (moderate certainty
evidence; downgraded for imprecision); the mean percentage difference
in BMD is at lumbar spine, 6.67% higher (5.34% higher to 8% higher)
with zoledronate and 0.27% lower with placebo; and at total hip, 6.07%
higher (5.91% higher to 6.23% higher) with zoledronate and 1.88% lower
with placebo (high certainty evidence). Based on one study comparing
zoledronate 5 mg each 18 months with placebo for osteopenic women
during a 6-y period: the rate of morphometric vertebral fracture is 25
women per 1000 in the zoledronate group (range 16-39) and 64/1000 in
the control group (absolute difference of 3.9% fewer events (4.8% fewer
to 2.5% fewer) (moderate certainty evidence; downgraded for
imprecision)); the rate of nonvertebral fragility fracture is 108 women
per 1000 in the zoledronate group (range 87-135) and 178/1000 in the
control group (absolute difference of 6.9% fewer events (9.1% fewer to
4.3% fewer) (moderate certainty evidence; downgraded for imprecision));
the rate of hip fracture is 8 women per 1000 in the zoledronate group
(range 3-19) and 12/1000 in the control group (absolute difference of
0.4% fewer events (0.9% fewer to 0.7% more) (moderate certainty
evidence; downgraded for imprecision)); the rate of cardiovascular event
is 118 women per 1000 in the zoledronate group (range 93-150) and 128/
1000 in the control group (absolute difference of 1% fewer events (3.5%
fewer to 2.2% more) (moderate certainty evidence; downgraded for
imprecision)); the mean percentage difference in CTX is 58.3% lower
(56.96 to 59.64% lower) with zoledronate and 10.2% higher with placebo
(high certainty evidence); the mean percentage difference in BMD is: at
lumbar spine, 8.46% higher (8.43% higher to 8.49% higher) with
zoledronate and 1.14% lower with placebo; and at total hip, 7.44% higher
(7.42% higher to 7.46% higher) with zoledronate and 3.97% lower with
placebo (high certainty evidence).
Conclusion: Moderate to high certainty evidence indicates zoledronate is
efficacious and safe during a 3-y period (5 mg yearly) for osteoporotic
women and a 6-y period (5 mg each 18 months) for osteopenic women.
Evidence supports the action of zoledronate lasts for more than 12
months, increasing bone mass and reducing bone markers. This might
justify carrying out studies for osteoporotic women with longer intervals
and large number of participants to evaluate reduction in number of
fractures. The toxicity profile of zoledronate appears acceptable, with
frequent nonserious transient adverse effects.
P255
DXA UNITS SPECIFIC CHARACTERISTICS ANALYSIS:
RESULTS FROM LAST 5 YEARS IN LATVIA
D. Pokšāne1, I. Rasa2
1Rīga Stradiņš University; Latvian Osteoporosis and Bone Metabolic
Diseases Association, 2Latvian Osteoporosis and Bone Metabolic
Diseases Association, Riga East Clinical University Hospital, Rīga
Stradiņš University, Riga, Latvia
Objective: Osteoporosis (OP) is a bone disease that occurs when the
body loses too much bone, makes too little bone, or both. As a result,
bones become weak and may cause low energy trauma fractures, leading
to severe disability and death. In 2019, there were 6762 unique pts with
femoral prosthesis and osteosynthesis surgery registered in Latvia. In
2019, 21,615 pts received reimbursement drugs for the treatment of
osteoporosis. DXA has an essential role in evaluating individuals at risk
of OP and helping clinicians advise pts about the appropriate antifracture
treatment. The main aim of this study was to analyse the specific
characteristics of each DXA units/cabinet during the 5 y and the
availability of diagnostic units for OP and osteopenia diagnosis in
different parts of Latvia.
Methods: In 2009 Latvian Osteoporosis and Bone Metabolic Disease
Association made a united register for all Latvia’s DXA and QCT units.
The annual characteristics of the DXA units are analysed each year at the
particular Association and medical staff Conference, which was based on
the EU OP Consultation Panel Questionnaire (2008) 6 questions
(modified). For the last 5 y starting from 2016, data have been collected
and analysed in this cross-sectional study.
Results: As of 2020 and 2021, there is a total of 24 DXA units in Latvia.
12 DXA units are located in the capital city Riga, and 12 are located in
different regional cities. IOF has recommended a DXA unit count of 10.6
per 1 million citizens, which Latvia fulfils with 24 DXA units per 1.93
million citizens. Despite a steady increase of DXA units from the 1st
DXA unit in 1989, 17 units in 2009 to 24 DXA units in 2020/2021, the
amount of DXA scans carried out decreased from 27,864 scans in 2016 to
26,884 scans in 2020. The number of pts diagnosed with OP had dropped
from 11,376 pts in 2016 to 10,288 pts in 2020. The waiting time has
increased from 17.6 days in 2016 to 17.5 days in 2020.
Conclusion: We conclude that for the last 5 yrs, DXA scans have
decreased, and the number of pts diagnosed OP has reduced. Further data
collection is needed. It is necessary to reduce the increasing waiting time
for DXA. There is also a need to educate patients and GP, medical staff
about OP.
P256
SEVERE OSTEOPOROSIS: PANDEMIC PICK UPS
A. Ghemigian1, N. Dumitru1, C. Tupea2, G. Voicu2, E. Petrova1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: During COVID-19 pandemic, the access to skeleton
investigations for osteoporosis was in many cases postponed, thus
consequences on fracture risk (FR) might be expected in terms of not
continuing the antiosteoporotic medication or not initiating it if needed.
Reduced physical activity might reduce the risk of fall, on one hand, but
associated sarcopenia and inhibition of bone formation due to lack of
physical exercise increase the FR, on the other hand (1-5). This is a case
report of a female with severe osteoporosis who delayed the presentation
for diagnostic during first 15 months of pandemic.
Case report: This is a 73-year-old female, known with a history of
osteoporosis since 2005. She also associates FR: chronic therapy with
different SSRIs for depression, multinodular goiter-related
hyperthyroidism (which was treated with radioiodine therapy). She has
chronic therapy for arteria hypertension, hyperlipemia and hiatal hernia.
At diagnostic, after initial lumbar T-score=-3.5 SD, she refused therapy
until 2015 (when T-score decreased to -4 SD), thus she began therapy with
intravenous ibandronate until 2017 when she experienced a vertebral
fracture and daily 20 μg of teriparatide was initiated, starting from a
DXA-BMD of 0.783 g/cm2, T-score of 3.1 SD. After 8 months, the
treatment was stopped because of her lack of compliance, so she
continued with annual zolendronic acid 5 mg until of T-score of -2.6
SD, BMD=0.856 g/cm2. In March 2020, when lockdown pandemic were
initiated, she had to come to reassessment, but delayed it, and refused
medication based on telemedicine recommendations, except for daily
1000 UI vitamin D. 14 months later, central DXA showed lumbar L1-3
BMD of 0.824 g/cm2, T-score of -2.9 SD, Z-score of -0.7 SD, hip BMD of
0.682 g/cm2, T-score of -2.6 SD, Z-score of -0.4 SD; 25-hydroxyvitamin
D of 29 ng/mL, PTH of 55 pg/mL, suppressed CrossLaps of 0.287 ng/mL
(normal: 0.33-0.782 ng/mL), osteocalcin of 17 ng/mL (normal: 15-46 ng/
mL), P1NP of 27 pg/mL (normal: 15-45 pg/mL); an additional T4 thoracic
fracture. Zolendronic acid was further recommended.
S175
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: During pandemic lockdown, the usual serial assays and
decision of therapy were less adequate based on telemedicine.
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Maturitas 2009;62:98.
2.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;70:3176.
3.
Radu L, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3483.
4.
Poiana C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:187.
5.
Sandru F, et al. Exp Ther Med 2020;20:3389.
P257
AGE-RELATED MUSCLE STRENGTH DECLINE IN EAST
AND WEST: OBSERVATIONS FROM TWO HARMONISED
COMMUNITY DWELLING COHORTS IN UK AND JAPAN
F. Laskou1, J. Zhang1, E. M. Dennison1, K. A. Jameson1, G. Bevilacqua1,
C. Cooper1, T. Iidaka2, C. Horii3, S. Tanaka3, N. Yoshimura2
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit Southampton, Southampton, UK,
2Dept. of Preventive Medicine for Locomotive Organ Disorders, 22nd
Medical and Research Center, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan,
3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Objective: Age-related decline in muscle strength is associated with
clinical outcomes including disability and increased mortality. However,
no previous study has compared its prevalence, demographic and lifestyle
associates, in comparable populations in different geographic regions.
Here we (1) consider the prevalence of this condition in harmonised UK
and Japan population based cohorts of older community dwelling adults,
and (2) report lifestyle associations with the condition.
Methods: UK study participants (1572 men; 1415 women) were
recruited from the Hertfordshire Cohort Study, a cohort study of
community-dwelling adults. Japanese participants (520 men; 1028
women) were recruited from the ROAD study, a study of community
dwelling Japanese adults. Lifestyle questionnaire data from the two
cohorts were harmonised. Age-related muscle strength decline was
measured in both studies using a dynamometer, with low values classified
as grip strength of <30 kg in men and <20 kg in women.
Results: The median age of UK participants was 65.8 (IQR 63.5-67.8)
years in men and 66.5 (IQR 64.5-68.7) years in women, while in Japan
this was 68 (IQR 58-76) years in men and 67 (57-74) years in women.
The prevalence of age-related muscle strength decline in the UK was
3.0% in men and 10.3% in women, higher than Japan (11.5% men and
16.1% women). In both cohorts, women were at greater risk of muscle
strength decline (UK: OR 3.73, 95%CI 2.66,5.23, p<0.001; Japan: OR
1.47, 95%CI 1.07-2.01, p=0.02), while greater height was protective
(p<0.001). Smoking was not associated with muscle strength decline in
either cohort, though drinking alcohol was protective in Japanese women
(OR 0.60, 95%CI 0.38-0.95, p=0.03). Age at leaving education was a
predictor of age-related muscle strength decline in both cohorts,
particularly in Japan, where more time spent in education was protective
in both genders (p<0.001); in the UK, this was significant in women only
(p=0.01).
Conclusion: Despite a different prevalence of age-related muscle
strength decline in comparable cohorts based in UK and Japan, the
anthropometric and lifestyle determinants of the condition were very
similar. These findings suggest that a global approach to prevention
may be appropriate.
P258
LIFESTYLE AND PHYSICAL WORKLOAD AS RISK
FACTORS FOR KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS: CLINIC-BASED
CASE-CONTROL STUDY
K. Ibragimov1, L. Tashinova1, N. Ishankulova1, N. Hamraueva1, I.
Axmedov1, F. Olimjonova1, S. Ziyadullayev1, I. Sultonov1, F. Xasanov1
1Samarkand State Medical Institute, Samarkand, Uzbekistan
Objective: To examine possible relationships between age, “lifestyle-
modifiable factors” (BMI, tobacco smoking, sports), and symptomatic
knee osteoarthritis in a clinic-based case–control study. Additionally,
the study aims to investigate the mode of interaction between BMI and
physical workload with respect to the risk of symptomatic knee
osteoarthritis.
Methods: In five orthopedic clinics and five practices, 87 male patients
aged 25-70 with radiographically confirmed knee osteoarthritis
associated with chronic complaints were recruited. The control group
comprised 261 male control subjects. In a structured personal interview,
body weight at different ages, body height, cumulative amount of
smoking, and cumulative duration of different sports activities until the
date of first diagnosis of knee osteoarthritis were elicited. Adjusted odds
ratios (ORs) and 95%CIs were calculated using unconditional logistic
regression analysis. Analyses were performed using R studio version
3.6.1.
Results: Age and overweight were strongly associated with the diagnosis
of knee osteoarthritis. Compared with people less than 35 years old, those
who were at least 65 years old had an OR of 16.3 (95%CI 6.1-58.7) for
knee osteoarthritis. Patients with BMI ≥28.41 kg/m2 had a strongly
elevated risk of knee osteoarthritis (OR 9.6; 95%CI 4.5-24.2) compared
to those with a BMI <22.86 kg/m2. Alternatively, heavy tobacco smoking
(≥10 pack/week) was associated with a decreased knee osteoarthritis risk
in comparison with never-smoking (OR 0.2; 95%CI 0.1-0.5). Ball games
(handball, volleyball, etc.) and cycling were associated with symptomatic
knee osteoarthritis (OR 3.1; 95%CI 1.2-7.3 and OR 3.7; 95%CI 1.6-8.6 in
the highest category of cumulative duration, respectively); to a weaker
degree jogging, swimming, and soccer also were positively related to
symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. Combining the two parameters, BMI
and kneeling/squatting into one variable led to a multiplicative interaction
mode for symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. For persons with elevated BMI
in combination with moderate to high exposure to occupational kneeling/
squatting, the attributable risk was 5.1%.
Conclusion: In accordance with the literature, we find a strong
association between BMI and knee osteoarthritis risk. Considering the
relatively high prevalence of occupational manual materials handling,
prevention of knee osteoarthritis should not only focus on body weight
reduction, but should also take into account work organizational measures
particularly aiming to reduce occupational lifting and carrying of loads.
P259
EFFICACY OF THE THROMBOCYTE DERIVED PRODUCT IN
KNEE PTOA TREATMENT
L. Khimion1, O. Burianov2, H. Havryliuk1, T. Omelchenko2, S.
Danyliuk1
1Shupyk National Healthcare University of Ukraine, 2Bogomolets
National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: At the absence of confirmed evidence based efficacy of the
OA pharmacologic treatment and rather high prevalence of post-
traumatic OA (PTOA), particularly of the knee, the development of
new approaches for the PTOA treatment is needed. This study aimed to
study efficacy and safety of the platelet autologous plasma (PAP)
comparing to standard treatment in young patients with symptomatic
knee PTOA.
Methods: Study included 62 patients (mean age 38.29±3.51 y) with
established symptomatic knee PTOA (mean time from trauma: 46.87
±2.09 months), I-II stages (X-ray). Patients with prominent known
primary OA risk factors (obesity, metabolic diseases), after knee surgery,
with other arthritis or any other uncontrolled diseases and disorders were
not included in the study. All patients consented to participate in the study
and were divided into 2 groups: Gr.1 received standard treatment
(NSAIDs, exercises, multimodal physiotherapy), Gr.2 received the course
of 3 intra-articular injections of PAP in addition to the standard treatment.
S176
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: During early observation period (first 2 weeks) all patients with
PTOA demonstrated significant improvement in pain and functional
activity, comparing to baseline values but patients from Gr.2
demonstrated better daily living activities and better points in KOOS
sport and recreation subscales. In 4 weeks the difference between groups
were more prominent, with better results of treatment in group treated
with PAP. Later, during the late observation period, second group still
demonstrated better outcomes (both comparing to the baseline and to the
first group), while Gr.1 patients partly returned to the baseline levels; after
3-6 months one-third of Gr.1 patients experienced 1-2 OA exacerbations,
accompanied by repeated NSADs use; in Gr.2 only 6.45% of patients has
had 1 OA exacerbation (p<0.05). During next 12 months of supervision
the majority of Gr.2 patients still had better knee functional capacity and
less pain comparing to the baseline, while Gr.1 patients showed no
significant difference with baseline in all KOOS parameters. No
significant complications were observed during PAP use, except of
temporary local pain at the injection site.
Conclusion: Use of the PAP intraarticular injections in addition to the
standard PTOA treatment improves both early and late results of
treatment, decreases the number of OA exacerbations and need in
NSAIDs use during 12 months after treatment.
P260
OSTEOSARCOPENIA AND TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS: A
CASE-CONTROL STUDY
A. Moretti1, M. Paoletta1, S. Liguori1, F. Gimigliano1, G. Iolascon1
1University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy
Objective: Osteosarcopenia has been defined as the coexistence of low
bone density (osteopenia/osteoporosis) and sarcopenia. Osteoporosis is
characterized by alterations in bone microarchitecture and decreased
BMD resulting in an increased risk of fractures, whereas sarcopenia is
the progressive decrease of both muscle mass and function that increases
the risk of falls. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is associated with poor
bone strength and muscle wasting, although the risk of osteosarcopenia in
patients with T2DM is not known so far. The aim of this study is to
investigate the association between osteosarcopenia and T2DM in
postmenopausal women (PMW).
Methods: PMW referring to our outpatient service of Physical &
Rehabilitation Medicine for the management of metabolic bone disorders
were enrolled. For all patients, DXA scans to measure bone density and
body composition parameters were performed. DXA-derived outcome
measures were femoral neck and lumbar spine BMD T-scores, and
appendicular lean mass. We also measured hand grip strength and the
Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) score to assess muscle
strength and physical performance, respectively. Levels of physical
activity were assessed according to the International Physical Activity
Questionnaire. Data were analyzed to calculate between-group
differences for the outcomes investigated.
Results: 36 PMW (12 T2DM, cases, and 24 non-T2DM, age-matched
controls) were enrolled. Patients with T2DM showed a higher risk of
osteosarcopenia compared to controls (OR 5.0, 95%CI 1.05-23.79,
p=0.043). Moreover, hand grip strength was significantly lower in
T2DM group (10.09±4.02 kg vs. 18.40±6.83 kg; p=0.001). However,
T2DM patients did not show a significantly higher risk of severe
osteosarcopenia (osteosarcopenia combined with poor physical
performance, SPPB <8; OR 5.0, 95%CI 0.94-26.49) compared to the
control group.
Conclusion: PMW affected by T2DM are at higher risk of
osteosarcopenia vs. nondiabetic patients. Further research on a large
cohort is required to improve knowledge about the association between
osteosarcopenia and diabetes.
P261
TRABECULAR BONE SCORE IDENTIFIES EARLY BONE
INVOLVEMENT IN PATIENTS WITH MULTIPLE
SCLEROSIS: A CASE-CONTROL STUDY
S. Liguori1, M. Paoletta1, A. Moretti1, G. Iolascon1
1University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy
Objective: To investigate bone involvement in patients with multiple
sclerosis (MS), particularly looking for instrumental parameters of early
bone damage.
Methods: We enrolled MS patients with mild disability (EDSS <3.5) and
as control group patients referred to our outpatient service of Physical and
& Medicine for the management of metabolic bone diseases. We assessed
BMD at total body-less head (TBLH), femoral neck (FN) and lumbar
spine (L1-L4) using DXA (GE Lunar) and trabecular bone score (TBS)
and evaluated muscle performance using the Short Physical Performance
Battery (SPPB). Based on SPPB scores, we identified two groups among
MS patients: group A, "poor performance" (SPPB score ≤8) and group B,
"high performance" (SPPB score>8). Finally, we performed a statistical
analysis to investigate the differences in qualitative and quantitative bone
parameters across each group.
Results: We included 13 MS patients, mean aged 57.35±7.96 y and 13
age-matched controls, mean aged 57.62±7.51 y. In the MS group, DXA
examination showed the following results: TBLH BMD = 1.114±0.20
g/cm2, T-score = -0.30±1.25 SD, Z-score = -0.13±0.99 SD; L1-L4 BMD
= 1.126±0.14 g/cm2, T-score = -0.56±1.19 SD, Z-score = -0.06±1.27 SD;
FN BMD=0.865±0.134 g/cm2, T-score = -1.19±0.95 SD, Z-score = -0.39
±0.93 SD. In the control group DXA examination revealed: TBLH BMD
= 1.206±0.34 g/cm2, T-score = 0.369±1.32 SD, Z-score = 0.90±1.11 SD;
L1-L4 BMD = 1.18±0.28 g/cm2, T-score = -0.09±2.17 SD, Z-score =
0.65±1.98 SD; FN BMD=0.96±0.20 g/cm2, T-score = -0.40±1.43 SD, Z-
score = 0.39±1.21 SD. The mean TBS was 1.222±0.83 in MS group, with
degraded (TBS <1.2) or partially degraded (1.2<TBS>1.350)
microarchitecture in 11 patients while mean TBS was 1.350±0.09 in the
control group (6 patients with 1.2<TBS>1.350). We found statistically
significant between-group differences for TBS and SPPB (p<0.001). In
the MS group, not statistically significant difference was reported for TBS
between patients with poor physical performance and those with high
physical performance.
Conclusion: In MS patients with mild disability, TBS could be useful for
early identification of bone involvement. Altered bone microarchitecture
might be influenced by inflammatory milieu of MS itself rather than
impaired physical performance in affected patients.
P262
DIGITAL OSTEOARTHRITIS AND PREDICTING SEVERITY
FACTORS
S. Abdellaoui1, A. Boukabous1, B. Bengana1, S. Lefkir-Tafiani1
1Issad Hassani Beni messous Hospital, Algiers, Algeria
Objective: Hand osteoarthritis (OA) is one of the most common
localizations of OA affecting mainly women. The etiology appears to
be multifactorial and the disease heterogeneous, comprising several
clinical, radiological and ultrasound subsets. Erosive digital OA is most
often painful, has inflammatory signs, causes functional impairment and
has a more unfavorable course than that of nonerosive osteoarthritis of the
hand. The objective of our study is to determine the clinical profile of
patients with digital OA (DOA) as well as the predictive factors
associated with the severity of this pathology.
Methods: We performed a trans-sectional descriptive study of 38 patients
with DOA meeting the criteria for ACR. SPSS.20 Software was
performed to data analysis.
S177
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: There were 38 patients: 84% women and 16% men, mean age 61
y. The BMI was 24 kg/m2, 47.36% had had a manual profession, 50%
had ≥1 comorbidity, 21.05% hypercholesterolemia, 39.47% osteoporosis,
and 29% associated thyroiditis. 28.12% of the women were in
perimenopause and 9.37% had a history of hysterectomy. Pain visual
analog scale (VAS) was 3.47/10, Dreiser's score was 7.87, CRP was 5
mg/L. Regarding the evaluation of quality of life, the SF-36 was 61.47/
100, the AIMS score was respectively 1.84 for social activity, 2.34 for
pain, 1.34 for depression, and 3.63 for physical activity. Knee and/or hip
OA was associated in 92.10% and 44.43% of cases. 66% had reported the
presence of finger nodules in the mother in family history. The injury was
more severe on the side of the dominant hand in 39.47% of cases. 60.52%
of patients presented Heberden's nodules, 34.21% of Bouchard's nodules,
63.15% an adductus inch and 13.15% an inch in “M” deformation.
Metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal, distal interphalangeal
and trapeziometacarpal were found respectively: clinically in 24%,
58%, 87% and 76% of cases, in 10.5%, 37%, 68% and 82% after X-ray
analysis and in 8%, 37%, 74% and 92% after ultrasound examination.
Regarding the "erosive" DOA, 79% of patients presented at least one
clinical and/or imaging criterion suggesting an erosive form. 7.89% of
patients had stiffness, 13.15% erythema, 34.21% swelling and 60.52%
paresthesias. On the hands X-ray: 7.89% had a "gull-wing"
appearance,78.94% presented with pinching and 2.63% with ankylosis
of the joint space. 28.94% had appearance of erosion/reconstruction on
ultrasound. Regarding therapy, 66% had taken analgesics, 21% of
NSAIDs, 68% used topical balms, 37% an OA drugs and 18% a hand
orthosis. Age ≥60 y, BMI ≥24, presence knee and/or hip OA (overweight/
osteophyte correlation was 36.84%), the presence of nodules,
comorbidities, thyroiditis, osteoporosis, history of hysterectomy and
Dreiser score were correlated with DOA severity. Whereas,
perimenopause, manual occupation, VAS pain, CRP and quality of life
score outcomes were not significant for seriousness of this impairment.
Conclusion: DOA is a very heterogeneous degenerative disease. The
main difficulty lies in identifying the predictive factors of an evolution
towards a severe erosive form leading to a significant degree of disability
and altering the quality of life. To date, the treatments remain
unsatisfactory, the place of DMARDs remains to be defined in this
pathology.
P263
MYOGENIC AND STRESS FACTORS ARE DIFFERENTIALLY
EXPRESSED IN SKELETAL MUSCLE OF OLDER ADULTS
WITH LOW MUSCLE STRENGTH
S. Dalle1, J. Dupont2, L. Dedeyne2, E. Gielen2, K. Koppo1
1Exercise Physiology Research Group, Dept. of Movement Sciences, KU
Leuven, 2Geriatrics & Gerontology, Department of Public Health and
Primary Care, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Objective: Sarcopenia is a growing concern in the ageing population.
This study aimed to compare protein expression profiles relevant in the
context of muscle ageing, such as myogenic, catabolic and stress-related
pathways between older adults with low compared to preserved muscle
strength.
Methods: Through biopsies of the m. vastus lateralis, muscle protein
expression profiles from 11 older adults that exhibited low muscle
strength (6♀and 5♂) were compared with the profiles of 13 older adults
with preserved muscle strength (8♀and 5♂), using western blotting
technique. Low muscle strength was defined according to EWGSOP2
sarcopenia diagnostic criteria, e.g., chair stand test >15 s or grip strength
<27 kg (male) or <16 kg (females).
Results: The low strength group was older (mean±SD; 78.0±5.0 vs. 71.5
±2.6 y; p<0.001), but weight (75.6±4.6 vs. 72.8±2.9 kg; p=0.617) and
BMI (26.7±2.5 vs. 27.2±6.0 kg/m²; p=0.782) were not different from the
preserved strength group. Performance significantly differed between the
low vs. preserved strength group for the chair stand test (17.5±4.9 vs. 9.1
±1.5 s; p<0.01), gait speed (1.0±0.2 vs. 1.4±0.1 m/s; p<0.001) and SPPB
test (median 9 [5-12] vs. 12 [10-12]; p<0.01) but hand grip strength was
not different (26.7±3.4 vs. 29.7±2.7 kg; p=0.559). Catabolic pathways,
i.e., ubiquitin-proteasome system (i.e., FOXO1/3a, MuRF1) and
autophagy (i.e., LC3b, Atg5) were not differentially expressed between
both groups, whereas myogenic factors (i.e., Pax7, MyoD) were
systemically upregulated (~2-fold), in the low strength group. Stress
markers CHOP and p-ERK1/2 were higher expressed (~1.5-fold) in the
muscle of the low strength group. Surprisingly, expression of the
inflammatory markers p-65NF-κB was higher (~7-fold) in muscle of
normal strength older adults.
Conclusion: Older adults with low muscle strength differ in muscle
expression profile, characterized by a higher expression of myogenic
and stress factors. Whereas stress factors might reflect the age-related
deterioration of tissue homeostasis, e.g., due to misfolded proteins
(CHOP), chronic upregulation of myogenic markers might be an attempt
to compensate for the gradual loss in muscle quantity and quality. These
data might provide valuable insights in the processes that underlie the
final stages of sarcopenia (at higher age), which can be different from
gradual muscle wasting (e.g., characterized by upregulated catabolic
processes).
P264
PREDICTIVE VALUE OF ULTRASOUND IN DIGITAL
OSTEOARTHRITIS
S. Abdellaoui1, A. Boukabous1, B. Bengana1, S. Lefkir-Tafiani1
1Issad Hassani Beni Messous Hospital, Algiers, Algeria
Objective: Digital osteoarthritis (DOA) is a complex degenerative
pathology with sometimes noisy joint manifestations that can mimic
inflammatory rheumatism. The osteoarticular ultrasound, is a valuable
addition to the clinical examination, remains little used for diagnosis
and monitoring DOA. The objective of our study is to analyze the
ultrasound characteristics of arthritic hands OA in order to know the
lesions and to better correlate the clinical data with the sonographic
results.
Methods: We performed an ultrasound study of 38 patients (76 OA
hands) suffering from DOA meeting the ACR criteria. SPSS.20
Software was performed to data analysis.
Results: There were 38 patients: 84% women, 16% men, mean age 61 y.
47.36% had a manual profession, 39.47% had associated osteoporosis,
66% had reported the presence of finger nodules in the mother in family
history. 60.52% of patients presented with Heberden's nodules, 34.21%
with Bouchard nodules, 63.15% an adductus inch and 13.15% an inch in
“M” deformation . Impairment of metacarpophalangeal, proximal
interphalangeal (PIP), distal interphalangeal (DIP) and
trapeziometacarpal were found respectively: clinically in 24%, 58%,
87% and 76%of cases, and in 8%, 37%, 74% and 92% after ultrasound
examination. The impairment was more severe from side of the dominant
hand in 39.47% of cases clinically vs 52.63% after an ultrasound analysis.
Regarding "erosive" DOA, 36.84% of patients presented at least one
clinical and/or sonographic criterion suggesting an erosive form. 7.89%
of patients had rigidity, 13.15% erythema, 34.21% swelling and 60.52%
paresthesia. According to ultrasound, 28.94% showed an erosion/
reconstruction aspect. 26.31% of the patients had presented an effusion
of the PIP, 47.36% an effusion of the DIP, grade 1 Doppler signal was
found in 15.78% with a strong clinical correlation and positive ultrasound
signs in 65.78% of cases, no synovitis was reported.
Conclusion: DOA is a very heterogeneous disease, the added value of
ultrasound appears to be of interest in the diagnosis and monitoring
patients with this pathology.
S178
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P265
EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF AROMATASE
INHIBITOR-INDUCED BONE LOSS
K. Nassar1, R. Assadi1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Rheumatology Dept., Hassan II
University of Medicine & Pharmacy,
Objective: Hormone therapy, especially anti-aromatases (AI) used as
adjunctive treatment of breast cancer have revolutionized cancer
management, but they induce bone loss and increase the risk of fracture.
Purpose of the study was to assess bone statues in patients under AI for
breast cancer, and the management of those with osteoporosis.
Methods: This is a descriptive, analytical study, carried out in the
rheumatology department, in bone disease unit. Inclusion criteria were
patients followed for breast cancer in the oncology department, treated by
AI and referred to the rheumatology department for bone evaluation and
management. All patients with vitamin D loss have been supplemented
before performing the DXA. Exclusion criteria were patients having
received another type of hormone therapy and presenting other risk
factors of osteoporosis. Demographic data were identified, and all these
patients received a measurement of BMD.
Results: Among 200 patients followed for breast cancer, 92 (46%) under
AI were include. The mean age was 58.22 y (41-75 y). 97% of the study
group were postmenopausal and 38% of them had postmenopause
secondary to treatment. 85 patients (92.4%) had osteoporosis and 7
(7.6%) patients had osteopenia. The average time between the start of
anti-aromatase therapy and the discovery of bone loss was 20.3 months.
On bone densitometry, the lumbar spine was the most affected site (87%)
with an average T-score at -2.84 and an average BMD at 0.843, followed
by the femoral neck (16.5%) and the total hip (13.7%). All osteoporotic
patients were treated with bisphosphonates: alendronate (60%),
risedronate (17% ) and zoledronate(12%).
Conclusion: The anti-estrogenic effect of AIs interferes with bone
metabolism during treatment for breast cancer, which increases the risk
of bone loss of risk of fracture. The frequency of bone loss in our series is
estimated at 46%. Assessment of bone status and the long-term follow-up
should be systematic in all patients followed for breast cancer on AI. The
hygiene and dietary measures and the supplementation of phospho-
calcium deficits must be corrected in patients in addition osteoporosis
treatment according to specific recommendations.
Table. Patients characteristics, bone status under AI and the management
of osteoporosis
Results
Total patient
92
Mean age
58.22 y
Average age of cancer diagnosis
46.75 y
Time from medication by AI bone loss diagnosis
20.3 months
Menauposal patients
97%
Menopause secondary to AIs
38%
Osteoporotic patients
85 (92.4%)
Patients with osteopenia
7 (7.6%)
Osteoporotic sites
Lumbar spine
88%
Femoral neck
17%
Total hip
14%
Metastatic cancer
15.18%
Bone
75%
Other
25%
Phosphocalcic statues (average value)
Calcemia
92.83 mg/l
Calciuria
131.8 mg/24-h
Phosphatemia
48.09 mg/l
25 OH vitaminD
19.78 ng/ml
PTH
79 pg/ml
Bisphosphonate therapies
Alendronate
60%
Risedronate
17%
Zoledronate
12%
P266
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC AND ELASTOGRAPHIC CHANGES
IN THE ACHILLES TENDON AND RETROCALCANEAL
BURSA IN HEALTHY POPULATION REGARDING
HABITUAL PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
C. A. Guillén-Astete1, C. Pijoán-Moratalla1, A. Barreal-Gómez2, I.
Matellán-Fernández2
1Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, 2CEU San Pablo, Madrid, Spain
Objective: Ultrasound examination, including elastography, has been a
subject of interest in the evaluation of patients with suspected or
diagnosed spondyloarthritis. It has been demonstrated that physical
activity, in the general population, leads to adaptive morphological
changes in the muscles and, it is expected, also at the tendon level. The
characterization of these changes should be considered when applying the
parameters of normality to the morphological characteristics of such well-
studied structures as the Achilles tendon. The purpose of this study is to
determine whether certain patterns of sporting activity (high, low or
sedentary) are associated with morphological changes of the Achilles
tendon and retrocalcaneal bursa.
Methods: 180 consecutive healthy volunteers, medical students or their
relatives, frequent users of 3 sports centers, and a group of volunteer
female employees of a large warehouse in the northern area of Madrid,
were recruited between December 2019 and January 2020. To avoid the
possible effect of degenerative changes, only adult subjects under 35 y of
age were included. The percentage of lean mass was obtained by
impedanciometry of four extremities. Ultrasound measurements
performed (Figure 1): tendon thickness at the calcaneal border (TH) and
at 1 cm proximal to this (TH-1), tendon diameter at the calcaneal border
(TD) and at 1 cm proximal to this (TD-1), cross-sectional area at the
calcaneal border (TA) and at 1 cm proximal to this (TA-1), bursa height
(BH) and enthesis length (TEL). Elastography was measured in m/s.
Results: Characteristics of the study population: 112 women, mean age
23.8 SD 2.7 y, 35% sedentary, 77.8% right-handed. All ultrasound
measurements except BH presented statistically significant differences
according to sex (Table 1). Differences in tendon morphological
characteristics were only identified between high-impact sports
participants and the rest of the volunteers, regardless of sex (Table 1). A
significant correlation was detected between lean mass percentage and
TH (Pearson 0.22, P<0.002), TH-1 (Pearson 0.364, P<0.001), and TEL
(Pearson 0.293, P<0.001). Wave conduction velocity (elastography) in
the tendon of males was 6.02 SD 1.6 and in females 5.4 SD 1.73 m/s
(P=0.038). Overall high-impact athletes had a velocity of 5.03 SD 1.68
and sedentary athletes 6.91 SD 0.93 m/s (P<0.001).
Conclusion: Physical activity leads to structural changes in the Achilles
tendon. High-impact physical activity should be taken into account in
patients in whom ultrasound examinations or elastographic studies are
performed, since normal parameters may require revision.
S179
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure 1. Representative scheme of the measurements taken during the
ultrasound examination of the Achilles tendon.
Table 1. Results of the ultrasound examination of the entire cohort studied
according to sex (female:female; male:male) and degree of physical
activity (sedentary:sedentary; low impact:low impact; high impact:high
impact). P-value: P-value.
Table 2. Results of the elastographic study. All measurements were made
in m/s. The results were grouped by sex, degree of activity, and leg
dominance.
P267
EFFECTS OF FREQUENT WEARING OF HIGH HEELS ON
A C H I L L E S T E N D O N U L T R A S T R U C T U R E A N D
ELASTOGRAPHY IN HEALTHY YOUNG WOMEN
C. A. Guillén-Astete1, C. Pijoán-Moratalla1, A. Barreal-Gómez2, I.
Matellán-Fernández2
1Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, 2CEU San Pablo, Madrid, Spain
Objective: Both for aesthetic and occupational reasons, high-heeled
shoes have become widespread among the western female population,
although it is becoming less frequent with advancing age. Like certain
physical activities performed regularly, the use of heeled shoes leads to
postural changes in plantar support that in turn could lead to the
development of adaptive processes of the Achilles tendon. The effect that
the use of heels would have on the echostructure and elasticity of the
Achilles tendon is not well known, however, given the relative extension
of their use among women, it would be convenient to know them at the
time of echography evaluation of a patient with suspected
spondyloarthritis. In the same way, patients with spondyloarthritis who
wear heels may undergo morphologic changes attributable to the
footwear rather than to the disease itself, and this will be of great interest
during clinical follow-up. The purpose of the present study was to
compare the ultrasonographic and elastographic findings of women
who wear heels for work purposes with healthy, athletic, or sedentary
volunteers who do not wear this type of footwear regularly. Methods:
112 female volunteers were recruited, 58 frequent heel wearers (>4 cm,
>15 h/wk, >1 y). An ultrasound examination of the Achilles tendon and
the retrocalcaneal bursa was performed as well as an elastographic study
of three foci of the longitudinal plane of the tendon. Direct comparisons
were made of the measurements obtained according to the use or non-use
of heels. Results: Heel wearers reported a mean of 35.2 SD 10 h/wk of
heel use. The enthesis length of heel wearers and non-heel wearers was
18.7 SD 2.4 mm and 17.7 SD 2.5 mm, respectively (P=0.0043; Mann-
Whitney U=1218.0). No other significant morphological differences were
detected. Elastography among heel wearers had a conduction speed of
6.95 SD 0.93 m/s and among non-wearers, 5.02 SD 1.58 m/s (P<0.001).
Among heel wearers, a positive correlation (Figures 1 and 2) was
observed between the number of h/week of use with thickness in the
longitudinal plane, transverse diameter, and cross-sectional area of the
tendon (Pearson coef. 0.420, 0.530, and 0.633, respectively; P<0.001 in
all cases). Conclusion: Regular heel wear in women leads to the greater
length of the Achilles enthesis and greater stiffness of the fibrillar
structure. In addition, the morphological changes of the tendon correlate
directly with the time of exposure to the use of this type of footwear. Our
findings suggest that when performing an ultrasound evaluation of the
Achilles tendon, we should take into account the history of frequent use of
high heels.
Figure 1. Dot plot showing the correlation between time of exposure to
wearing high-heeled shoes and the cross-sectional area of the Achilles
tendon at the edge of the calcaneus (talocalcaneal emergence point).
S180
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure 2. Dot plot showing the correlation between time of exposure to
wearing high-heeled shoes and the cross-sectional area of the Achilles
tendon at 1 cm proximal to the edge of the calcaneus (talocalcaneal
emergence point).
P268
CLINICAL SERVICES RECOVERY MATRIX (CSR-MATRIX):
THE EXAMPLE OF PATIENT STRATIFICATION FOR THE
RESTORATION OF BONE HEALTH ASSESSMENT
SERVICES DURING THE ONGOING HEALTHCARE CRISIS
E. P. Kariki1, I. Ntanos2
1Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust/Department of Clinical
Radiology/Manchester Royal Infirmary - The University of Manchester/
School of Health Sciences/Division of Informatics, Imaging & Data
Sciences, 2Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust/Breast
Surgery Unit/North Manchester General Hospital - The University of
Manchester/Alliance Business School and School of Social Sciences,
Manchester, UK
Objective: Facilitate the safe recovery of health services after the initial
COVID19 healthcare lockdown, ensuring equal reliable care.
Methods: After the initial reaction to Covid19, with increasing pressures
on elective patient care, we designed CSR-MATRIX, a dynamic Clinical-
Service-Recovery tool. Based on the national risk alert level information1,
the population COVID-19 risk assessment2, the Royal College of
Radiologists guidelines3 and Royal Osteoporosis Society guidance4, we
developed CSR-MATRIX and stratified bone health assessment patient
referrals for our bone mineral densitometry and vertebral fracture
assessment services at our Trust according to low, medium, high
COVID-19 clinical risk and examination priority. The matrix is adaptable
to different national risk alert levels, various clinical services, their
patients’ needs and providers’ preferences. We implemented the CSR-
MATRIX in 2 DXA units, trained 3 radiographers with a 4-h session and
a follow-up discussion.
Results: In June 2021 we had 3957 referrals for BMD (<5% CT-BMD);
87% of these were from mid-January 2020 onwards. User1: Reviewed 87
referrals in 5 d, User2: 462 referrals in 7 d, User3: 257 referrals in 8 d (a
day is a 7-h shift, other nonscanning tasks were also performed). In 8 d,
20.4% of the referrals had been reviewed and stratified, in 3 d 153 patients
had been identified for immediate scanning, which corresponded to up to
8 working days for the 3 DXA scanners under COVID-19 public safety
measures (1 patient at a time, disinfection in between patients, patients
waiting outside hospital).
Conclusion: Healthcare services are the first to bear the burden in
emergency events, even more so in pandemics. Shutting down elective
care created an immense load to the already strained health services. The
CSR-MATRIX is a pragmatic, flexible tool that can be used to stratify
healthcare users fairly and safely in a responsible standardised manner.
References:
1. GOV.UK. Our plan to rebuild: The UK Government’ COVID-19
recovery strategy, 11/May/2020
2. NHSDigital. COVID-19 Population Risk Assessment, 2020
3. RCR. COVID-19 interim guidance on restarting elective work, 7/May/
2020
4. ROS. Toolkit: DXA restoration of service, 2020.
P269
BIOELE CT RICAL IMPEDANCE ANALYSIS FOR
PR ED IC TION OF BONE MINERA L D EN SITY IN
HEMODIALYSIS PATIENTS
M. Mazurenko1, A. Enkin2, S. Mazurenko1, U. Gomon3
1Saint Petersburg State University, 2Leningrad Regional Hospital, 3First
Saint Petersburg State Medical University I. P. Pavlov, Saint Petersburg,
Russia
Objective: The risk of fractures in CKD patients is significantly
increased. Assessment of BMD by DXA is proved to be effective for
prediction of fractures in dialysis patients. However X-ray densitometers
are not always available in dialysis centers, and there are not criterion,
except fractures and FRAX, to select patients who need BMD analysis.
Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) is not expensive and can be
available at any center. The aim of the study was to assess the coherence
between body composition estimates analyzed by BIA and bone mineral
density measured by DXA in patients with CKD stage 5D.
Methods: Body composition, was analyzed by Tanita BC-401 and BMD
was measured by DXA (Hologic QDR Discovery W). Study included 64
patients with CKD Stage 5 (30 men, 34 women) on hemodialysis. The
average age of patients was 44.5±9.0 y, the duration of RRT patients from
12-201 months. Methods of descriptive statistics included the estimation
of the mean with SD and the median with quartiles (25-75%). Intergroup
differences were evaluated by parametric (student's t-test) and
nonparametric analysis methods (Mann–Whitney U test). Spearman
correlation was performed to analyze relationship between variables. In
each of these methods the level of significance was set at P‐values <0.05.
Results: Comparative analysis of body composition showed women had
more fat in the body (both% and kg) and men had more lean mass in kg.
Results of BIA of dialysis patients:
S181
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Table.
Variables
male
female
p
Body fat (%)
20.8
±8.8
30.9
±5.1
<0.001
Body lean ass (%)
20.5
±4.1
19.6
±2.5
>0.05
Body fat mass (kg)
16.6
±7.9
20.7
±4.8
<0.05
Body lean mass (kg)
15.1
±2.2
13.1
±2.1
<0.05
In whole group of dialysis patients BMD g/cm2 of the distal arm
correlated with height (r=+0.8; p<0.001), weight (r=+0.5; p<0.01), lean
body mass (kg) (r=+0.5; p<0.01) and fat (%) ( (r= 0.41; p<0.05). T-score
of the distal arm correlated with weight (r=+0.41; p<0.01), BMI (r=+0.51;
p<0.05), lean body mass (r=+0.36; p<0.05). Z-score of the distal arm
correlated with weight (r=+0.5; p<0.01), BMI (r=+0.51; p<0.01), and
fat (kg) (r=+0.38; p<0.05). BMD g/cm2 of the lumbar spine (L1-L4)
correlated with height (r=+0.35; p<0.05) and lean body mass (kg) (r=+
0.5; p<0.01). T-score of the lumbar spine correlated with lean body mass
(kg) (r=+0.36; p<0.05). Z-score does not real any significant correlation
with the other variables. BMD g/cm2 of the total hip correlated with
height (r=+0.39; p<0.05) weight (r=+0.54; p<0.01), lean body mass
(kg) (r=+0.42; p<0.05). T-score of the total hip correlated with weight
(r=+0.44; p<0.01), lean body mass (r=+0.34; p<0.05), fat (kg) (r=+0.35;
p<0.05). Z-score of the total hip correlated with weight (r=+0.39;
p<0.05), lean body mass (r=+0.34; p<0.05), fat (kg) (r=+0.38; p<0.05).
When we analyzed men and women separately revealed that in men body
fat (kg) showed more influence on BMD (r=+0.57; p<0.01), T-score (r=+
0.57; p<0.01), and Z-score (r=+0.65; p<0.001) of the distal arm than in
women.
Conclusion: BIA is not the best method for prediction of BMD in dialysis
patients and does not reveal great advantage before constitutional
characteristics of the patients. Maybe more sophisticated equipment than
we used in the study will show better results. We will try to study this in
the future.
P270
ULTRASOUND CHARACTERIZATION OF THE PLANTAR
FASCIA: A COMPARATIVE STUDY BETWEEN PATIENTS
W I T H S P O N D Y L O A R T H R I T I S A N D H E A L T H Y
VOLUNTEERS, HIGH-IMPACT ATHLETES AND HIGH-HEEL
USERS
C. A. Guillén-Astete1, C. Pijoán-Moratalla1, L. Seghers-Aguilar2, S.
Espejo-Polidura2
1Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, 2CEU San Pablo, Madrid, Spain
Objective: The plantar fascia is one of the most frequently affected
enthesis territories in patients with spondyloarthritis. Plantar fasciitis,
not related to these diseases, is also a frequent pathology linked to
alterations in the biomechanics of plantar support. The plantar fascia,
moreover, is one of the most relevant structures in plantar flexion of the
foot and is therefore subject to bodyweight loading in high-impact sports.
Although plantar fasciitis is defined clinically, it is noted by
demonstrating an increase in its thickness. The purpose of the present
study is to determine whether there are differences between the plantar
fasciae of healthy subjects, high-impact athletes, high-heel users, and
patients with spondyloarthritis (with plantar fascia involvement).
Methods: between December 2019 and January 2020, sedentary
healthy volunteers (medical students and relatives), basketball and
volleyball players, female workers of a department store heel
wearers (>4 cm, >15 h/wk, >1 y), and patients with a known
diagnosis of spondyloarthritis and plantar fascia involvement were
recruited. An ultrasound examination of the plantar fascia of the
dominant foot was performed in the longitudinal plane, at the level
of the calcaneal border and 10mm distal to it. To exclude changes
attributable to age, volunteers under 35 y of age were included. The
ultrastructure of the fascia was dichotomously assessed as normal or
altered. All scans were performed by an expert sonographer
unrelated to the type of volunteer being scanned.
Results: 46 sedentary volunteers (<2 h weekly exercise), 42
federated basketball and volleyball players, 58 female heel wearers,
and 26 patients diagnosed with spondyloarthritis and plantar
fasciitis were included. Table 1 summarizes the demographic and
anthropometric characteristics of the included subjects. The
thicknesses of the plantar fascia heights in the longitudinal plane
at the height of the calcaneal border are shown in Table 2. No
statistically significant differences were identified between the
thickness of the patients and the high-impact athletes. Statistically
significant differences were identified in the comparisons between
the remaining three height means, depicted in Figure 1. The
proportion detecting altered echostructure occurred in 76.9% of
patients, 38% of high-impact athletes, and 10.3% of heel wearers,
and 8.6% of sedentary people. Statistical comparison of these
proportions is shown in Figure 1.
Conclusion: The ultrasound changes observed in the plantar fascia in
patients with spondyloarthritis and plantar fasciitis are similar to those
presented by high-impact athletes both at the level of ultrastructure and
fascia thickness. According to these results, it is advisable to know the
history of sports activities of patients with suspected spondyloarthritis or
under follow-up for this diagnosis when evaluating the plantar fascia
ultrasonographically.
Table 1. Demographic and anthropometric characteristics of the
population studied.
Table 2. Results of the ultrasound assessment of the plantar fascia.
S182
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure 1. Comparisons of quantitative (superior) and categorical (inferior)
ultrasound findings among groups studied.
P271
AMINO ACID METABOLITE PROFILE OF LOW BMD IN
IRANIAN ELDERLY: BUSHEHR ELDERLY HEALTH
PROGRAM
N. Panahi1, N. Fahimfar1, S. Roshani2, S. Gharibzadeh3, B. Arjmand4, E.
Migliavacca5, D. Breuille5, J. N. Feige5, Y. Grzywinski5, J. Corthesy5, R.
Heshmat6, I. Nabipour7, A. Soltani8, F. Farzadfar2, B. Larijani9, A.
Ostovar1
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran,
2Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 3Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, 4Metabolomics &
Genomics Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Molecular-
Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran, 5Nestlé Research, EPFL Innovation Park, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 6Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology &
Metabolism Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 7The Persian Gulf Marine
Biotechnology Research Center, The Persian Gulf Biomedical Sciences
Research Institute, Bushehr University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr,
Iran, 8Evidence Based Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology &
Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 9Endocrinology & Metabolism Research Center,
Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Amino acids play an important role in bone health and have
been the most frequently reported metabolites associated with low BMD
in metabolomics studies. We hypothesized that amino acid metabolic
profile may be an early indicator of bone deterioration in the elderly
population reflected in BMD.
Methods: We randomly selected 400 individuals from 2384 elderly men
and women participating in the second stage of the Bushehr Elderly
Health (BEH) program, a population-based prospective cohort study that
is being conducted in Bushehr, a southern province of Iran. Frozen
plasma samples were used to measure 34 amino acid and derivatives
metabolites using the UPLC-MS/MS-based targeted metabolomics
platform. We conducted the least absolute shrinkage and selection
operator regression analysis to examine the ability of measured
metabolites to predict low BMD.
Results: When adjusted for possible confounders (age, BMI, diabetes,
smoking, physical activity, and sex), 5 metabolites were associated with
femoral neck BMD, 17 metabolites with total hip BMD, and 8
metabolites with lumbar spine BMD (17 metabolites in total). Four
metabolites (L-glutamine, L-tryptophan, 3-methylhistidine, and L-
leucine) were associated with all 3 sites BMDs. We also observed that
lower leucine, valine, tryptophan, and 3-methylhistidine, and higher
glutamine could differentiate osteoporosis from non-osteoporosis in both
women and men (Figure).
Conclusion: We found several amino acid metabolites associated with
bone status in elderly individuals. Further studies are required to evaluate
the bone health effect of these metabolites and their usefulness as clinical
biomarkers for osteoporosis prediction.
P272
ASSESSMENT OF REHABILITATION PROGNOSIS IN
PATIENTS WITH NEUROPATHIES
A. Filipovich1
1National Science and Practice Centre of Medical Assessment &
Rehabilitation, Yukhnovka, Belarus
The evaluation of the rehabilitation potential and the rehabilitation
prognosis in 30 patients with neuropathies, mainly of traumatic genesis
was carried out. of traumatic genesis during the rehabilitation period was
carried out. Taking into account rehabilitation potential and rehabilitation
prognosis determination, a list of indications for specific rehabilitation
measures (type, frequency, duration, number of procedures in the course),
an individual rehabilitation program (IRP) was formed.
Rehabilitation prognosis was determined in relation to specific categories
of disabilities (movement, selfcare) in the early and late recovery periods,
based on nosology, the severity of syndromic and functional disorders,
the nature of the recovery process, taking into account age, comorbidity,
intoxicating factors (alcohol use, smoking), the assumed influence of
environmental factors.
Rehabilitation prognosis was assessed taking into account the probability
of realization of the goals of rehabilitation in relation to separate
components of the rehabilitation potential, mainly according to the degree
of severity of the statodynamic disturbances. For patients with high
severity of disabilities (mostly with traumatic sciatic nerve injury) with
functional class (FC) 3 of the ability to move or selfcare, prognosis was
made taking into account anticipated recovery in the six-month period
after rehabilitation of active daily activities. In patients with disability
categories within FK2 (mostly with upper extremity nerve damage),
prognosis was based on the expected recovery of the ability to perform
activities of daily living in the 6-month period after rehabilitation. was
based on the expected recovery of the ability to work and accordingly
realization of the labor prognosis.
Favorable rehabilitation prognosis was determined when a high
probability of full restoration of the impaired activity categories (self-
care, movement) with of objective possibilities (rehabilitation means
S183
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
and conditions) for the realization of the rehabilitation potential in full
taking into account the full recovery of the everyday activity and the
ability to work. ability to work. The rehabilitation prognosis was defined
as doubtful, with probable possibility of partial realization of the
rehabilitation potential in cases of insufficient effectiveness of measures
to implementation of IPR, with the prognosis of partial restoration of the
impaired categories of vital functions with a decrease in the degree of
their limitations.
An unfavorable rehabilitation prognosis occurred when the impossibility
of partial restoration of the impaired categories of vital activity and
reduction of the degree of their limitations, the impossibility of realizing
the rehabilitation potential. These cases occurred with progression of
musculoskeletal pathology, pathogenically unrelated to the traumatic
factor.
P273
REHABILITATION AND EXPERT DIAGNOSIS OF
DISORDERS, DISABILITIES IN PATIENTS WITH
NEUROPATHIES ON THE BASIS OF ICF
A. Filipovich1
1National Science and Practice Centre of Medical Assessment &
Rehabilitation, Yukhnovka, Belarus
In the course of the research, the algorithm of the rehabilitation evaluation
of neurological disorders, restrictions of vital functions in patients with
statodynamic disturbances caused by traumatic and compression-
ischemic neuropathies was developed on the basis of the International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). The algorithm
provides for certain stages, interrelations 117 in the assessment of body
function and structures, activity, and participation both in conducting
rehabilitation measures, as well as medical and social expertise, and is
carried out with the aim of standardizing the medical services rendered.
Within the framework of the presented general model of ICF use a three-
level diagnostic algorithm for expert evaluation of impairments and
disabilities has been developed, which optimized for the already existing
technology of examining patients by specialists of medical and
rehabilitation expert commissions, which use a system of quantitative
assessment of impairments, limitations of vital activity in the category
of "functional class".
In the course of the study, a list of methods for objectification of the
presence and severity of statodynamic impairments was developed. The
detailed list of methods intended for practical use, includes a number of
separate diagnostic tables. The diagnostic list contains such categories as
the assessed diagnostic expert attribute or indicator, assessment technique
(expert-rehabilitation diagnostics), registered and analyzed indicators,
peculiarities of carrying out methods, nature of changes in pathology. It
is suggested to perform the assessment (as markers of "function" state in
the ICF system): statodynamic status (muscle strength and muscle tone,
deep reflexes, skin reflexes, pathological reflexes); simple sensorimotor
reactions and complex sensorimotor reactions with Schilder, Stewart-
Holmes tests; static coordination of upper and lower extremities; dynamic
coupled coordination of trunk, upper and lower extremities;
biomechanical assessment of walking function, active and passive
movements in joints and spine; simple and complex types of sensitivity.
Assessment (as markers of "structures" condition): results of ultrasound
diagnostics of nerve structures and vascular segment with evaluation of
presence and expression of morphological changes in nerve structures,
results of electroneuromyography diagnostics - conduction velocity,
rhythm, symmetry of electrical velocity, rhythm, symmetry of electrical
activity, character of response to functional tests; peripheral emodynamic
indexes, Peripheral hemodynamic indices in the segments of the affected
limb using rheovasography and rasospasmography. using
rheovasography and calculation of rheographic index, index of venous
outflow obstruction.
P274
THE CURRENT PROBLEMS OF DIAGNOSIS AND THERAPY
OF OSTEOPOROSIS IN THE MODERN MEGAPOLIS
T. Semenova1, S. Mazurenko1, K. Egorov2, L. Ermolaeva1, M.
Shabalina1
1Saint Petersburg State University, 2Saint George City Hospital, Saint
Petersburg, Russia
Objective: Saint Petersburg is a second biggest city in Russia with
very well developed high quality health care system. It has many
centers with modern diagnostic equipment for diagnosis and therapy
of osteoporosis. There are no significant problems with the
availability of osteoporotic drugs. At the same time the problem of
early diagnosis and therapy of osteoporosis is still exists. The aim of
this study was to investigate the level of the diagnosis and treatment
of osteoporosis in patients admitted with low-trauma fractures to
trauma and orthopaedics department of a big municipal hospital.
Methods: We analyzed cases of 101 patients (77 women, 24 men)
with low-trauma fractures. The average age was 65.4±16.3 y. 15
women were premenopausal and 62 postmenopausal. The average
BMI was 26.4±6.3. All patients were interviewed for the presence
of osteoporosis risk factors, its diagnosis and treatment before the
fracture, the presence of comorbidities, and physical activity before
the fracture. The results were processed using the standard software
for applied statistical analysis.
Results: 47 patients had fractures of the femur (32 femoral neck
fractures, 8 diaphyseal fractures, 7 femoral pertrochanteric). 28
patients had tib-fib fractures, 12 had fractures of shoulder bones
and distal forearm. 32 patients had a previous history of a low-
energy fractures. 23 patients noted the presence of low-energy
fractures in close relatives. 31 patients underwent hip arthroplasty,
35 patients underwent metal osteosynthesis. The average age of
patients at the time of the first low-energy fracture was 62.7+13.0
y. 49 people smoked before the first fracture. 20 patients continued
to smoke afterwards. The average duration of smoking is 20.6+17.7
y. 11 patients consumed alcohol more often than once a week, 1
patient 3-4 times a week and 1 everyday. One patient reported
drinking binges. 8 patients received long-term glucocorticosteroid
therapy. 25 patients had spontaneous falls during the year preceding
the fracture. The average number of falls was 3.0±2.2 per year. 31
patients were diagnosed with coronary heart disease, 54
hypertension, 18 chronic heart failure, 18 chronic cerebrovascular
accident, 7 chronic kidney disease stages 2-3, 4 type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Densitometry (DXA) was performed in 11 patients before
admission to hospital. Osteoporosis was diagnosed in 7 patients,
osteopenia in 3 patients. Only eight patients received osteoporosis
treatment: 4 patients consumed vitamin D and calcium supplements
irregularly, 3 patients received short-term treatment with
bisphosphonates, 1 patient had single denosumab injection. Most
patients reported a lack of available information about the
possibility of diagnosing and treating osteoporosis before the
fracture and after the first fracture.
Conclusion: We revealed the common risk factors for fractures in the
studied group: female gender, postmenopausal age, smoking, alcohol
abuse, glucocorticosteroid intake, falls, and previous low-energy
fractures. The most common comorbidities were diseases of the
cardiovascular system, which increase the risk of falls. At the same time
we revealed problems with primary and secondary prevention of fragility
fractures. The lack of information about osteoporosis, simple ways to
prevent and diagnose the disease is the main problem. Health care
professionals should provide patients with more accessible information
about osteoporosis. Awareness among clinicians and health care
professionals on osteoporosis should be increased to overcome the
burden of the disease.
S184
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P275
EXAMINING THE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TREATMENT
AND PAIN AND PHYSICAL FUNCTION OUTCOMES IN
PATIENTS WITH OSTEOARTHRITIS: A MEDIATION
MODELING APPROACH
L. Abraham1, R. H. Dworkin2, D. C. Turk3, J. D. Markman2, D. A.
Williams4, A. G. Bushmakin5, J. A. Hall6, D. C. Semel7, J. C.
Cappelleri5, R. Y. Yang7
1Pfizer Ltd., Tadworth, UK, 2University of Rochester, Rochester, USA,
3University of Washington, Seattle, USA, 4University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, USA, 5Pfizer, Groton, USA, 6Eli Lilly and Company,
Indianapolis, USA, 7Pfizer, New York, USA
Objective: To better understand the complex relationships between
treatment and pain and physical function (PF) outcomes, we investigated
a set of mediation models of osteoarthritis patients’ responses to
tanezumab.
Methods: Data came from 2 randomized trials of tanezumab (Study 1:
NCT026977731, Study 2: NCT027094862). A set of mediation models
was used to explore the interrelationships among treatment, PF as
measured by the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities
Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC*) PF scores, and pain (WOMAC Pain
scores) as a mediator of the effect of treatment on PF: (a) cross-
sectional mediation models, (b) longitudinal mediation models, and (c)
pseudo steady-state longitudinal mediation models. Variables in the
cross-sectional mediation models were: treatment (tanezumab vs.
placebo), pain and PF scores (models were assessed separately at weeks
2, 4, 8, 12, 16, or 24). The longitudinal mediation models estimate
relationships using data from all weeks simultaneously. The longitudinal
steady-state mediation model also uses all available data at weeks 2, 4, 8,
12, 16, and 24 with the assumption that relationships among variables in
the model are the same at all time points.
*©1996 Nicholas Bellamy. WOMAC® is a registered trademark of
Nicholas Bellamy (CDN, EU, USA).
Results: The cross-sectional and longitudinal mediation models showed
that the indirect effect of treatment through pain on PF was stable across
time (cross-sectional: 78.8-95.1%, all P<0.0001; longitudinal: 70.5-
86.6%, all P<0.0001), indicating that a pseudo steady-state model is
appropriate. The longitudinal steady-state mediation models showed that
the indirect effect of the treatment on PF was 77.8% in Study 1 and 74.1%
in Study 2 (P<0.0001, respectively), while the direct effect of the
treatment on PF was 22.2% for Study 1 (P=0.0003) and 25.9% for
Study 2 (P=0.0019).
Conclusion: At least 75% of the treatment effect of tanezumab on
physical functioning can be explained by the improvements in pain.
However, tanezumab has an additional effect on physical functioning
(approximately 25%), which is independent of improvements in pain.
Research is needed to explain this effect and evaluate additional
mediators (e.g., sleep, fatigue, method variance) that may contribute to
the observed direct effect.
References:
1.
Schnitzer TJ, et al. JAMA 2019;322:37.
2.
Berenbaum F, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2020;79:800.
Acknowledgments: This study was funded by Pfizer and Eli Lilly and
Company. Medical writing support was provided by Shuang Li, PhD, of
Engage Scientific Solutions, and funded by Pfizer and Eli Lilly and
Company.
Disclosures: Robert H. Dworkin, PhD, has received in the past 5 years
research grants and contracts from the US Food and Drug Administration
and the US National Institutes of Health, and compensation for serving on
advisory boards or consulting on clinical trial methods from Abide,
Acadia, Adynxx, Analgesic Solutions, Aptinyx, Aquinox, Asahi Kasei,
Astellas, AstraZeneca, Biogen, Biohaven, Boston Scientific, Braeburn,
Cardialen, Celgene, Centrexion, Chromocell, Clexio, Collegium,
Concert, Confo, Decibel, Dong-A, Editas, Eli Lilly, Ethismos (equity),
Eupraxia, Glenmark, Gloriana, Grace, Hope, Immune, Lotus, Mainstay,
Merck, Neumentum, Neurana, NeuroBo, Novaremed, Novartis, Olatec,
Pfizer, Phosphagenics, Quark, Reckitt Benckiser, Regenacy (also equity),
Relmada, Sanifit, Scilex, Semnur, SIMR Bio, SK Life Sciences, Sollis,
SPRIM, Teva, Theranexus, Trevena, Vertex, and Vizuri. Dennis C. Turk
has received research grants and contracts from the US Food and Drug
Administration and US National Institutes of Health and has received
compensation for consulting on clinical trial and patient preferences from
AccelRx, Eli Lilly and Company, Flexion, GlaxoSmithKline, and Pfizer.
David A. Williams has received research grants from the National
Institutes of Health and has received compensation for consulting on
clinical trials and behaviourally based interventions with Swing
Therapeutics, Inc. and Community Health Focus Inc. John D. Markman
has the following to disclose: Ad board: Clexio Biosciences, Flexion
Therapeutics, Quark Pharmaceuticals, Quartet Medicine, Collegium
Pharmaceutical, Purdue Pharma, Biogen, Novartis, Aptinyx, Nektar,
Allergan, Grünenthal, Eli Lilly and Company, Depomed, Janssen, Teva
Pharmaceutical Industries, KemPharm, Abbott Laboratories, Plasma
Surgical, Chromocell, Convergence Pharmaceuticals, Inspirion, Pfizer,
Sanofi, Daiichi Sankyo, and Trevena. Consultant: Trigemina, Editas
Medicine, and Plasma Surgical. Data safety monitoring board: Novartis
and Allergan. Jerry A. Hall is an employee of Eli Lilly and Company with
stock and/or stock options. Andrew G. Bushmakin, Lucy Abraham, David
C. Semel, Joseph C. Cappelleri, and Ruoyong Yang are employees of
Pfizer with stock and/or stock options.
P276
THE CASE OF X-LINKED HYPOPHOSPHATAEMIA (XLH)
V. Vasylets1, N. Tikhonchuk1
1Multifield Medical Center of Odessa National Medical University,
Odessa, Ukraine
Objective: To improve diagnostics of XLH as a rare lifelong disease in
adult rheumatological practice.
Methods: Based on clinical observation of 51 y.o. male with an
erroneous diagnosis of ankylosing spondylitis (AS).
Results: Patient R. presented chronic diffuse musculoskeletal pain
during 15 y, both of inflammatory and mechanical character,
morning stiffness up to 90 min. There was no synovitis. Patient
was of short stature – 1.70 m. Patient assessed pain VAS as 7.5/
10. Chronic use of NSAIDs with a weak effect. CRP – 5 mg/dl,
ESR – 12 mm/h, HLA-B27 – negative. No MRI signs of inflammatory
bone edema in sacrum and iliosacral joints were identified. There was
calcification of anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments at levels C5-
T7. Sacroiliac joints were poorly differentiated. Massive marginal bony
outgrowths in both acetabular cavities, greater and lesser trochanters. X-
ray slits were not narrowed. Bony growths in the area of the ischial bones
(hyperostosis) and enthesites are very characteristic, present at the attached
X-Ray (Picture 1). Further examination showed: serum phosphorus was
decreased to 0.6 mmol/l (normal range 0.81-1.45), serum PTH was normal
– 29.4 pg/ml (15.0-65.0). Phosphorus in 24-h urine was elevated to 71.8
mmol/24-h (12.9-42.0). XLH diagnosis should be confirmed by molecular
genetic analysis or determination of FGF23 levels before treatment, if
possible. Traditional treatment includes alphacalcidol, phosphates.
Burosumab – fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody against FGF23
was approved by FDA, 2018.
Conclusion: Serum phosphorus level decrease is a mandatory, although
not specific, sign of hypophosphatemia. Clinical diagnosis of XLH
should be based on symptoms of rickets and osteomalacia in combination
with a hypophosphataemia and kidney loss of phosphorus. Calcium and
vitamin D deficiency are absent. Rheumatologists should be aware of
signs and symptoms of XLH and assess the serum phosphorus level in
patients with existing or suspected AS.
S185
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P277
IMPACT OF NON-HIP FRACTURES IN ELDERLY WOMEN: A
NARRATIVE REVIEW
A. Charles1, A. Mugisha2, L. Iconaru1, F. Baleanu1, F. Benoit2, M.
Surquin2, P. Bergmann3,4, J.-J. Body1,2,4
1Dept. of Endocrinology, CHU Brugmann, 2Dept. of Internal Medicine,
CHU Brugmann, 3Dept. of Nuclear Medicine, CHU Brugmann,
4Laboratory of Translational Medicine, CHU Brugmann, Brussels,
Belgium
Objective: The association of hip fractures with adverse outcomes is well
established but, for non-hip fractures, this association still needs to be
further investigated. The objective of this narrative review is to describe
the state of the art with regards to the health impact of clinically relevant
non-hip fracture locations in postmenopausal women. Methods: PubMed
and Scopus databases were searched from January 2010 until December
2020. Studies were included when the crude rates and/or relative risk of
one-year subsequent fractures and/or mortality were reported as well as
the precise fracture site. Results: Twenty-three studies met the inclusion
criteria. Regarding mortality rates, there was a high variability between
studies, with higher rates for vertebral, proximal humerus and pelvic
fractures. There was a small or no impact of wrist, ankle or tibia fractures.
The mortality rate increased with age after vertebral, proximal humerus
and wrist fractures. Moreover, proximal humerus and vertebral fractures
were associated with a higher mortality risk. Although it is claimed that
fracture risk is increased after any fragility fracture, few studies have
actually investigated fracture risk according to the site of an index
fracture. Our review indicates that the one-year risk of subsequent fracture
is significantly increased after an initial proximal humerus, vertebral or
pelvis fracture. Conclusion: This narrative review indicates that, besides
hip, fractures of vertebrae, proximal humerus or pelvis deserve more
attention when trying to prevent adverse outcomes of osteoporosis.
More studies on the topic of non-hip fractures are urgently needed.
P278
GREATER PQCT CALF MUSCLE DENSITY IS ASSOCIATED
WITH LOWER HIP FRACTURE RISK, INDEPENDENT OF
FRAX, FALLS AND BMD: A META-ANALYSIS IN THE
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES IN MEN (MROS) STUDY
N. C. Harvey1, E. Orwoll2, J. A. Cauley3, T. Kwok4, M. K. Karlsson5, B.
E. Rosengren5, E. Ribom6, P. M. Cawthon7, K. Ensrud8, E. Liu9, K. A.
Ward1, C. Cooper1, J. A. Kanis10, M. Lorentzon11, C. Ohlsson12, D.
Mellström12, H. Johansson9, E. V. McCloskey13
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK, 2Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
USA, 3Dept. of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA, 4Dept. of Medicine &
Therapeutics and School of Public Health, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 5Clinical & Molecular Osteoporosis
Research Unit, Dept. of Clinical Sciences Malmo, Lund University and
Dept. of Orthopedics, Skane University Hospital, Malmo, Sweden,
6Dept. of Surgical Sciences, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden,
7Dept. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, USA, 8Medicine and Epidemiology & Community Health,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA, 9Mary MacKillop
Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic University,
Melbourne, Australia, 10Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, 11Institute of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Molndal,
Sweden, 12Centre for Bone & Arthritis Research, Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 13Centre
for Integrated research in Musculoskeletal Ageing, Mellanby Centre for
Musculoskeletal Research, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
Objective: To investigate the predictive performance of pQCT measures
of both calf muscle density (an established surrogate for muscle adiposity)
and size (cross-sectional area, CSA) for hip fracture (HF).
Methods: pQCT (Stratec XCT2000/3000) measurements at the tibia
were undertaken in the MrOS US, Hong Kong (HK) and Swedish
Gothenburg (SW) cohorts. Analyses were by cohort and synthesised by
meta-analysis. The predictive value for incident HF, using an extension of
Poisson regression adjusted for age and follow-up time, was expressed as
gradient of risk (GR=hazard ratio per SD increase in the exposure).
Further analyses adjusted for femoral neck(fn) BMD T-score, FRAX
10-y fracture probability (major osteoporotic fracture) and prior falls
(y/n, in the preceding 12 months).
Results: We studied 1008 (US), 1662 (HK), 581 (SW) men, mean (SD)
age 77.0 (5.1), 73.9 (4.9), 80 (3.4) y, followed for a mean (SD) 7.9 (2.2),
8.1 (2.3), 4.4 (1.6) y, with 31, 47, and 34 incident HF respectively. Both
greater muscle cross-sectional area (CSA) and greater muscle density
(suggesting lower muscle adiposity and higher muscle quality) were
associated with a lower risk of incident HF [GR: 0.79
(95%CI:0.65,0.96) and 0.83 (95%CI:0.69,0.99) respectively]. The
pattern of associations was not materially changed by adjustment for prior
falls or FRAX probability. In contrast, after inclusion of fnBMD T-score,
the association for muscle CSA was attenuated [GR: 0.97
(95%CI:0.80,1.19)], whereas that for muscle density was not materially
changed [GR: 0.74 (95%CI:0.62,0.89)].
Conclusion: pQCT measures of greater calf muscle density and cross-
sectional area were both associated with lower incidence of hip fractures
in older men, but only muscle density remained an independent risk factor
for fracture after accounting for femoral neck BMD T-score. These
findings demonstrate a complex interplay between measures of bone,
and muscle size and quality, in determining fracture risk.
Acknowledgements: We thank the participants of MrOs US, Sweden,
and Hong Kong. The Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study is
supported by National Institutes of Health funding. The following
institutes provide support: the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
(NIAMS), the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences
(NCATS), and NIH Roadmap for Medical Research under the following
grant numbers: U01 AG027810, U01 AG042124, U01 AG042139, U01
AG042140, U01 AG042143, U01 AG042145, U01 AG042168, U01
AR066160, and UL1 TR000128. MrOS Sweden is supported by the
Swedish Research Council, ALF/LUA research grants in Gothenburg,
and the King Gustav V and Queen Victoria Frimurarestiftelse Research
Foundation.
S186
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P279
THE BEST PREDICTIVE FACTORS AMONG CLINICAL AND
STRUCTURAL CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH KNEE
REPLACEMENT: A NESTED CASE-CONTROL STUDY
J.-P. Pelletier1, M. Dorais2, P. Paiement3, J.-P. Raynauld1, J. Martel-
Pelletier1
1Osteoarthritis Research Unit, University of Montreal Hospital Research
Centre (CRCHUM), Montreal, 2StatSciences Inc., Notre-Dame-de-l’Île-
Perrot, 3ArthroLab Inc., Montreal, Canada
Objective: In the search in osteoarthritis (OA) patients for knee
replacement (KR) predictors, very little information is available on the
role of the concomitant symptoms, malalignment, and structural changes
on a study population over an extended period of time. With the use of a
nested case-control study allowing to measure the effect of various
clinical and structural joint features in different time frames before KR,
we investigated which changes in OA risk factors were most associated
with the occurrence of KR.
Methods: Participants were from the Osteoarthritis Initiative: 195 KR
cases were matched with 468 controls. They had a KR after cohort entry
(cases), and controls matched for age, gender, income, WOMAC pain,
Kellgren-Lawrence grade, and duration of follow-up. Changes were
calculated as differences between the values at KR and baseline
discriminating women and men. Conditional logistic regression analyses
were performed.
Results: Worsening of WOMAC scores (crude odd ratios 1.02-1.20,
p≤0.012), KOOS (1.02-1.04, p≤0.014), and knee injuries sustained 30-
40 years before KR (women 2.70, p=0.034) were associated with the
occurrence of KR. Also associated with KR were cartilage volume loss
in the lateral compartment (>0%, overall 1.76, p=0.025; women 1.93,
p=0.047) and medial compartment (≥10%, overall 1.54, p=0.027; men
2.34, p=0.008) and an increase in bone marrow lesions (BMLs) for
women (1.09, p=0.048). The association of risk factors with KR was
reinforced when patients presented both an increase in WOMAC pain
and cartilage volume loss (1.85, p=0.001). Pain medication usage, mainly
narcotics and intra-articular steroid injections (IASI), was also associated
with KR. IASI in the follow-up period did not demonstrate a detrimental
effect on cartilage loss, in cases and controls, indicate that structural
changes were not causal of KR.
Conclusion: This study provides further evidence that worsening of OA
symptoms, cartilage volume loss, BMLs, and, to a lesser extent, older
injuries are important risk factors for KR occurrence, particularly in
women. Previous use of pain medication and IASI were associated, but
not causal, with the imminent occurrence of KR, a finding of clinical
importance.
Disclosure: JPP and JMP are shareholders, JPR and MD are consultants,
and PP an employee in ArthroLab Inc.
P280
AN AUTOMATED PATIENT- AND GENDER-SPECIFIC
M O D E L F O R E A R L Y K N E E O S T E O A R T H R I T I S
STRUCTURAL PROGRESSOR SCREENING
J.-P. Pelletier1, H. Bonakdari1, A. Jamshidi1, F. Abram2, G. Tardif1, J.
Martel-Pelletier1
1Osteoarthritis Research Unit, University of Montreal Hospital Research
Centre (CRCHUM), Montreal, 2Medical Imaging Research &
Development, ArthroLab Inc., Montreal, Canada
Objective: There is a need for an automated screening system for the
early detection of knee structural progressors in osteoarthritis (OA). Our
aim was to build a patient- and gender-based machine learning (ML)
model that bridges major OA risk factors and serum levels of
adipokines/related inflammatory factors at baseline for early prediction
of at-risk knee OA patient structural progressors over time.
Methods: The serums (n=677) were from the Osteoarthritis Initiative
(OAI) cohort. The model development used baseline serum levels of
six adipokines, three related inflammatory factors, and their ratios (36),
as well as two major OA risk factors (age and bone mass density [BMI])
(n=47 variables). Subjects were classified for their probability of being
structural progressors using our published prediction model1, including
baseline, two X-rays, and three magnetic resonance imaging variables.
Five ML classification methodologies were evaluated; the support vector
machine demonstrated the best accuracy and was further used for the
identification of the most important variables in relation to being
structural progressors and the model development. A reproducibility
analysis was performed with an external cohort from a clinical trial.
Results: Data revealed that the combination of age, BMI, and the ratios
CRP/MCP-1 and leptin/C-reactive protein (CRP) are the most important
variables in predicting OA structural progressors in both genders.
Classification accuracies for both genders in the testing stage (OAI) were
>80%, with the highest sensitivity of CRP/chemoattractant protein-1
(MCP-1). Reproducibility analysis demonstrated an accuracy ≥92%; the
ratio CRP/MCP-1 showed the highest sensitivity in women and leptin/
CRP in men.
Conclusion: This study offers a new automated patient- and gender-
specific model, using only three baseline serum biomarkers and two
demographic factors for identifying, at an early stage, individuals at-risk
of being knee OA structural progressors. This model is a new step toward
precision medicine, as it will significantly improve early clinical
prognosis of knee OA patients with real time patient monitoring.
Reference: 1. Jamshidi A, et al. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis
2020;13;12.
Disclosures: JPP and JMP are shareholders and FA an employee of
ArthroLab Inc.
P281
MULTIMORBIDITY AND FRAGILITY FRACTURES: A
NATIONWIDE STUDY
A. B. Barcelos1, D. L. Lopes2, H. C. Canhão2, J. C. B. Cunha Branco2, A.
M. R. Rodrigues2
1NOVA National School of Public Health, Public Health Research
Centre, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 2EpiDoC Unit, CEDOC,
NOVA Medical School, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
Objective: Multimorbidity is very common in elderly patients and there
is insufficient knowledge in Portugal about the burden of multimorbidity
in patients with prevalent fragility fractures (FF). The aim of this cross-
sectional study is evaluate the association between multimorbidity with a
prevalent FF in women with 50 years old and more.
Methods: Women aged 50 y and older from the EpiReumaPt study
(2011-2013), a nationwide, population-based study, were evaluated.
Selfreported data regarding sociodemographic, health-related quality of
life, physical functions, FF and multimorbidity was collected through a
semistructured questionnaire. Women with prevalent FF were compared
with women without prevalent FF.
Results: The estimated prevalence of FF in women older than 50 y of age
was 17.5%. Wrist fractures were the most prevalent fracture site (18.6%)
and 57.1% of women reported one prevalent FF in the last twelve months.
We verified that 43.7% of women with FF reported having had at least
one fall in the previous year. A higher prevalence of multimorbidity
(74.6%) has been found in the group of women with FF, after adjusted
for age group, marital status, NUTSII and educational level. A statistically
significant difference between Azores and Lisbon regions was found. For
women with multimorbidity the probability of having a FF is 40% higher
relatively to women with just one or no selfreported noncommunicable
chronic diseases. In the group of women with FF, rheumatic disease and
hypertension (62.7% and 58.6%, respectively) were the two most
selfreported noncommunicable chronic diseases. Having FF combined
S187
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
with multimorbidity brings increased risk to a lower quality of life and a
higher degree of disability.
Conclusion: Women after 50 years old in Portugal with multimorbidity
had a significant higher FF incidence compared with women at the same
age with just one or no selfreported noncommunicable chronic diseases.
FF combined with multimorbidity brings increased risk to a lower
quality of life and a higher degree of disability. This study should
emphasize the need to redesigned health services to care for patients
in order to prevent noncommunicable chronic diseases and FF,
especially in patients older than 50 years old.
P282
MUTATION DETECTION IN POSTMENOPAUSAL PATIENTS
WITH OSTEOPOROTIC HIP FRACTURE USING TARGETED
NEXT GENERATION SEQUENCING
M. P. Zumaraga1, C. Tanchoco2, P. J. Medina3, C. Palmes-Saloma4
1Dept. of Science & Technology - Food & Nutrition Research Institute,
Taguig, 2International Life Sciences Institute – SEA Region, Manila,
3Mindanao State University – Iligan Institute of Technology, Iligan,
4Philippine Genome Center, University of the Philippines Diliman,
Quezon, Philippines
Objective: To identify disease-causing mutation in the vitamin D
receptor (VDR) gene in a group of postmenopausal women with
osteoporotic hip fracture using targeted next generation sequencing
(NGS).
Methods: A total of 26 unrelated women with osteoporotic hip fracture
admitted at the Philippine Orthopedic Center were included. Custom
AmpliSeq™VDR gene panel was designed to specifically target the
VDR gene using Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine.
Results: A total of 1322 unique variants in the whole 101 kb VDR gene
in this group of patients with osteoporotic hip fracture was determined.
Noteworthy is the identification of two novel heterozygous frameshift
mutations. Of the two mutations, particularly interesting is the p.K111fs
that is found in the nuclear receptor’s hinge region between VDR’s ligand
binding domain and DNA binding domain.
Conclusion: Targeted NGS was successful in surveying the VDR gene
for polymorphisms correlated with osteoporotic hip fracture. Through
NGS technologies, we were able to sequence thousands of variants in
postmenopausal patients with fragility fractures. Two of these genetic
variants were found to potentially cause osteoporotic hip fracture in
women volunteers. Such can provide valuable insight in VDR control
as well as elucidate mechanism of disease pathogenesis.
P283
DISCOVERY OF GENETIC MARKERS CORRELATED WITH
VITAMIN D: A STRATEGY TO OPTIMIZE DIETARY
VITAMIN D RECOMMENDATION FOR MULTIPLE HEALTH
OUTCOMES IN THE PHILIPPINES
M. P. Zumaraga1, M. A. Concepcion1, C. Duante1, M. Rodriguez1
1Dept. of Science & Technology - Food & Nutrition Research Institute,
Taguig, Philippines
Objective: In the Philippines, based on the 2013 National Nutrition
Survey, vitamin D deficiency was highest in Benguet at 60.3% and lowest
in Cagayan, but still very high, at 19.5%. With vitamin D implicated in a
wide range of multiple health outcomes, a fuller understanding of the
determinants of vitamin D status is needed and must include
consideration of inherited characteristics. The study determined the
relationship of serum vitamin D levels and genetic variations in 502
lifestyle related genes among adult respondents, age 21 years old and
above, from the 2013 Philippine National Nutrition Survey (NNS).
Methods: The study followed a cross-sectional research design. A total
of 1160 adult respondents of the 2013 NNS and living in metro Manila,
Philippines were included in the study. Anthropometric, biochemical,
clinical and dietary data were generated through validated questionnaires,
physical examination and laboratory analyses. Total serum 25-
hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD3) wa s determined using
electrochemiluminescence binding assay method. Genomic DNA was
used for massively parallel sequencing of 502 lifestyle related genes.
Results: Of the study participants, 56% were classified as having low
serum 25OHD3 concentration (<75 nmol/mL). Low 25(OH)D was
associated in the following gene/genotypes: KNG1 rs11924390 T/T;
ANKH rs2454873 G/G; NPFFR2 rs4129733 T/G; SH2B1 rs4788102
G/A; RAP1A rs494453 T/T and CRHBP rs7728378 T/C. These genes
were previously associated to the risk of osteoporosis, obesity, type 2
diabetes mellitus, and stress response.
Conclusion: Large-scale analysis of genes associated with lifestyle disease
and other determinants of overall health have shown great utility in the
discovery of genes and polymorphisms that play a role in vitamin D
nutrition. It is envisioned that understanding how genetic variations interact
with environmental factors, especially nutrition may hold the key to better
prevention and management of nutrition-related diseases and may be basis
for future innovative genome-based functional food product development
enriched with vitamin D.
P284
COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF FRACTURE LIAISON
SERVICE IN SECONDARY PREVENTION OF FRAGILITY
FRACTURES IN SPAIN
A. Naranjo1, D. Prieto-Alhambra2, J. Sánchez-Martín3, A. Pérez-Mitru3,
M. Brosa3
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr.
Negrín, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de
Gran Canaria, Spain, 2NIHR Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research
Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 3Oblikue Consulting,
Barcelona, Spain
Objective: To assess the cost-effectiveness of a Fracture Liaison Service
[FLS] model compared to standard care for secondary prevention of
fragility fractures in Spain.
Methods: Disease progression was simulated with a Markov model
through 7 health states (with and without anti-osteoporotic [OP]
treatment, subsequent hip, vertebral, forearm and humerus fracture, and
death) within a cohort of OP patients after initial fragility fracture who
were candidates to initiate anti-OP treatment with a mean age of 65 years
old and a mean proportion of females of 90.7%. A time horizon of 10 y
and a 6-month duration per cycle was set. Clinical, economic, and quality
of life parameters were drawn from the literature and local clinical
practice. Use of resources and treatment patterns were validated by a
panel of experts. The Spanish National Health System [NHS] perspective
was adopted, taking into account direct healthcare costs expressed in
2020 Euros. A time preference discount rate of 3% was applied to costs
and healthcare outcomes. Uncertainty of the parameters was assessed
through an extensive range of deterministic, scenario and probabilistic
sensitivity analyses.
Results: Implementing FLS for the secondary prevention of fragility
fractures in Spain would provide a greater anti-OP treatment initiation
and persistence. This would reduce subsequent fragility fractures, which
would result in a reduction of disutilities and deaths. The results of this
analysis showed a greater clinical benefit (0.01 and 0.08 life-years and
quality-adjusted life years [QALYs] gained per patient, respectively)
compared to standard of care. This would imply a higher cost (€563.69/
patient) leading to an incremental cost-utility ratio of €6,855.23 per
QALY gained. The multiple sensitivity analyses showed limited
S188
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
dispersion of the base case results, corroborating their robustness and
conservative approach.
Conclusion: From the NHS perspective and considering the locally
established willingness-to-pay thresholds, the implementation of FLS
would be cost-effective in the Spanish setting in comparison with
standard care for secondary prevention of fragility fractures.
Acknowledgment: This study was funded by Amgen (Europe) GmbH.
P285
EFFECT OF AROMATASE INHIBITORS ON BONE MINERAL
D E N S I T Y
A N D
T R A B E C U L A R
B O N E
MICROARCHITECTURE IN PATIENTS WITH BREAST
CANCER
M. Tsagareli1, E. Giorgadze1, T. Sulikashvili1, N. Jeiranashvili1
1National Institute of Endocrinology, Tbilisi, Georgia
Objective: Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are important components of
adjuvant endocrine therapy in postmenopausal women with estrogen
receptor positive breast cancer. The aim of our study was to assess the
effect of Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) on BMD and trabecular bone
microarchitecture in patients with breast cancer.
Methods: We studied 52 postmenopausal women (between 45-70 y)
receiving adjuvant therapy (anastrozole or letrozole) after breast cancer.
We measured lumbar spine (LS) and proximal femur (PF) BMD using
DXA; trabecular bone score (TBS) was calculated using TBS iNsight
software. DXA baseline assessment was obtained within 3 months of
commencing therapy and after 2 y of treatment. Patients were divided
in two groups: in group 1 were enrolled 27 patients with normal BMD
and partially degraded bone microarchitecture (mean TBS - 1,312); in
group 2 – 25 patients with T-score <-2 and partially degraded bone
microarchitecture (mean TBS - 1,245). Patients in group 1 received Ca
and Vit D, patients in group 2 started oral bisphosphonate (OB). DXA
BMD and TBS values were assessed after 24 months of therapy.
Results: After 2 y interval in women from group 1 bone loss estimated to
6.1%, TBS decreased by 5.8%. In patients treated with OB DXA BMD
value decreased by 2.7%, TBS decreased by 6.4%.
Conclusion: An AI treatment is associated with significant BMD loss
and degraded bone microarchitecture. Bisphosphonates did not show
positive effect on bone microarchitecture.
P287
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND SECULAR TRENDS OF PELVIC
FRACTURES: A RETROSPECTIVE, POPULATION-BASED,
NATIONWIDE OBSERVATIONAL STUDY
M. Herteleer1, M. Dejaeger2, S. Nijs1, H. Hoekstra1, M. R. Laurent3
1Traumatology Dept., University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, 2Geriatrics
Dept., University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, 3Geriatrics Department,
Imelda Hospital, Bonheiden, Belgium
Objective: Fractures of the pelvis and acetabulum are associated with
osteoporosis, reduced mobility and imminent risk of further fractures.
Still, the epidemiology of these central fractures has received little
attention. This study aimed to describe the annual incidence of pelvic
and acetabular fractures in Belgium.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective, nationwide, population-based
study using the National Institute for Health and Disability Insurance
database. Multiple codes for the reimbursement of the diagnosis and
treatment of pelvic and acetabular fractures were collated and (since
2006) linked to the patients’ age group, sex and region.
Results: From 1988-2018, 91317 pelvic and acetabular fractures were
diagnosed. The overall incidence increased from 15.8/100000 persons/y
in 1988 to 29.7/100000 persons/year in 2006 and to 37.6/100.000 persons/
y in 2018. These fractures showed a bimodal incidence, with a small peak
in children (particularly boys), and an exponential increase in older adults,
being twice as high in women vs. men. By linear regression, there was a
significant decline in fracture incidence between 2006-2018 in the 20-29 y
age group (9.8 to 8.7/100000 person-years, p=0,0015), and an increase in
age groups 30-39 y (6.3 to 8.2/100000 person-years, p=0.0176), 50-59 y
(14.8 to 22.0/100000 person-years, p=0.0002), 60-69 y (30.6 to 42.1/
100000 person-years) and 70-79 y (81.5 to 96.0/100000 person-years,
p=0.0136). Between 2006-2018, 5957 patients (12.36%) underwent pelvic
or acetabular fracture surgery. Surgical repair was performed in 2088
patients with acetabular fractures and 3869 patients with pelvic fractures.
There were 3622 (60.8%) surgeries in patients younger than 60 y and 2335
(39.1%) in patients 60 y and older. For acetabular fractures, the proportion
of surgical treatment was higher in Brussels (7.6%) compared to other
regions (Flanders 3.8%, Wallonia 5.2%, both p<0.0001).
Conclusion: There is an increasing incidence of pelvic and acetabular
fractures in Belgium, due to both a rising age-adjusted incidence and
aging of the population. Most fractures are managed non-surgically, albeit
with significant regional differences. Younger adults have the highest
proportion of surgical treatment, but given the much higher incidence in
older adults, there is a considerable amount of operations in older adults
too. Our findings inform regional policy making for fragility fractures of
the pelvis.
Disclosures: Aspen Pharma (M.H.); Mathys Orthopaedics Belux,
Zimmer Biomet, Johnson & Johnson, MSD (S.N.); Alexion, Amgen,
Kyowa Kirin, Menarini, UCB, Takeda and Will Pharma (M.R.L.); all
unrelated to this work.
P288
TREATMENT GAP AMONG PATIENTS WITH PRIMARY
OSTEOPOROSIS: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW
AND META-ANALYSIS
S. Leroy1, P. Saunders-Hastings2, P. Eusebi1, V. Taieb1, B.
Abrahamsen3, E. V. McCloskey4, S. Fujiwara5, C. Libanati1, A.
Moayyeri1
1UCB Pharma, Brussels, Belgium, 2Epi Excellence LCC, Ottawa,
Canada, 3Dept. of Medicine, Holbæk Hospital, Holbæk, Denmark;
Open Patient Data Explorative Network, Institute of Clinical Research,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 4Centre for
Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK;
Mellanby Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK, 5Yasuda Women’s University, Hiroshima, Japan
Objective: Despite clinical guidelines, patients (pts) diagnosed with
osteoporosis (OP) or a recent fragility fracture (fx) are often not treated;
we explored treatment gap characteristics and magnitude.
Methods: To investigate treatment rate, we conducted a PRISMA-
compliant systematic literature review (SLR) and random-effect meta-
analysis (MA) on MedLine publications to June 2020. Observational
studies including pts with diagnosed OP or incident fx reporting
quantitative treatment rate estimates were included. Each SLR step
involved 2 independent reviewers and several subgroup MAs were run.
Results: 139 articles were included in the SLR (N=3,911,151 pts) and
131 in the MA (N=2,092,369 pts). The overall pooled treatment rate was
29.7% (95%CI 25.2-34.7), notably lower in high-quality studies (Table).
Pooled treatment rates were similar across different geographies. Pts with
history of fx prior to index date had higher treatment rates compared with
pts without history of fx (42.2% vs. 21.1%). Vertebral fx pts were more
likely to receive OP treatment (Table).
Conclusion: This study confirms the concerning level of undertreatment of
primary OP pts as a worldwide challenge. High-quality real-world studies
show that only one in four pts with OP or fx are treated. Pts with multiple fx
are more likely to receive OP treatment but still at a far from optimal rate
(42.2%).
S189
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Acknowledgements: Study funded by UCB Pharma and Amgen Inc.;
Medical writing services: Costello Medical.
Disclosures: SL, PE, PSH, VT: Contractor: UCB Pharma; BA:
Consulting: Kyowa-Kirin and UCB Pharma. Speakers fees: MSD,
Pharmacosmos and UCB Pharma. Institutional research grants: Kyowa-
Kirin, Novartis, Pharmacosmos and UCB Pharma; EVM: Advisor/
consultant and speaker fees: UCB Pharma; SF: Consulting: Teijin
Pharma; AM, CL: Employee: UCB Pharma; Stock: UCB Pharma.
P289
FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH BONE METABOLISM
PARAMETERS IN PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
BEFORE AND AFTER SURGERY
S. Akcay1, D. Gogas Yavuz1
1Marmara University School of Medicine, Dept. of Endocrinology &
Metabolism, Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: Although primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is usually
asymptomatic and diagnosed incidentally, unwanted effects of excessive
PTH can be observed during diagnosis of PHPT. The aim of this study is
to identify the factors affecting BMD values and changes in bone
metabolism parameters before and after surgical intervention for PHPT.
Methods: A total of 214 patients (59.6±12.2 y, F/M: 187/27) diagnosed
PHPT were included in the study. 145 patients underwent to the surgery
(59.1±11.8 y, F/M: 123/22) and 69 patients were followed under medical
treatment. Preoperative and postoperative first year available data such as
demographic parameters, clinical characteristics, laboratory data,
adenoma diameter and location with neck USG and sestamibi imaging,
BMD measurements.
Results: DXA measurements revealed osteopenia in 88 (41.1%) and
osteoporosis in 55 (25.6%) of all patients at the time of diagnosis.
Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria were observed in 205 (95.8%) and
75 (35.0%) of the patients. Serum Ca (p<0.01), PTH (p<0.05) and ALP
(p<0.05) levels were significantly higher in hypercalciuric patients
compared to normocalciuric patients. Postoperative in the first year,
serum Ca (p<0.0001), PTH (p<0.0001), ALP (p<0.0001), 24-hour
urinary Ca levels (p<0.0001) decreased compared to preoperative values,
and serum P (p<0.0001) level increased significantly. L1-L4 lumbar spine
BMD increased compared to preoperative period (p<0.05) while both
femoral neck and L1-L4 lumbar spine BMD values at the time of
diagnosis in patients under medical treatment were similar in the first
year. At the diagnosis, PTH levels correlated with L1-L4 lumbar spine
(p<0.01, r=-0.22), femoral BMD (p<0.001, r=-0.26), ALP (p<0.0001,
r=0.36), serum Ca (p<0.0001, r=0.53), 24-h urinary Ca (p<0.05,
r=0.15) and the maximum diameter (p<0.0001, r=0.52) while negatively
correlated with levels of serum P (p<0.0001, r=-0.49) and 25-OH vitamin
D (p<0.0001, r=-0.26) in whole group.
Conclusion: Osteoporosis and osteopenia observed more frequent in
PHPT than estimated population frequency. One year after surgery, while
normocalcemia and normal PTH levels achieved improvement in BMD
observed at lumbar spine.
P290
THERAPEUTIC ADHERENCE IN PATIENTS WITH
PREVIOUS OSTEOPOROTIC VERTEBRAL FRACTURE
M.-J. Montesa1, N. Montesino1, C. Córdoba1, B. González1
1Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de
Tenerife, Spain
Objective: To evaluate the adherence to osteoporosis therapies in a
sample of patients with previous osteoporotic vertebral fracture.
Methods: This study was a longitudinal observational analysis
characterizing osteoporosis medications adherence in those patients
who started treatment between January and December 2018. Data were
obtained from patients attended in our Fracture Liaison Service (FLS)
with at least one osteoporotic vertebral fracture. We measure the
percentage of patients who retained the treatment verified by electronic
prescription after 24 months. In addition, descriptive data was collected
including age, sex and osteoporosis treatment.
Results: The total number of patients evaluated was 83. After exclusion
of patients with a fewer than 6 months of follow-up, the final study
population was 64, mean age 69.8 y, 90.6% women. 10 (15.6%) received
alendronate, 1 (1.6%) risedronate, 10 (15.6%) zoledronate and 43
(67.2%) denosumab. 5 patients who received denosumab (11.6% of
them) showed no adherence, only 1 patient who received alendronate
and 1 patient with zoledronate (10% of each) showed no adherence.
Conclusion: Patients with vertebral fractures who continue follow-up for
more than 6 months in our FLS showed optimal therapeutic adherence to
osteoporosis medications.
P291
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN CLINICAL PARAMETERS AND
SERUM CYTOKINE LEVELS IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
PATIENTS WITH OBESITY
E. P. Trifonova1, E. V. Zonova1, O. V. Sazonova1
1Novosibirsk State Medical University, Novosibirsk, Russia
Objective: Obesity is a most frequent factor which can influence on
development and progression of osteoarthritis (OA) and has similar
mechanisms of immunopathogenesis. This study aimed to explore the
symptoms and the proinflammatory serum cytokine levels in OA (hand,
knee, hip) patients with obesity and to estimate relationships between
clinical and immunological features.
Methods: Patients who participated in this study (n=250) were divided in
two groups: patients with bilateral hand, knee and hip OA (n=169) and
obesity and control group (n=81) which had only hand, knee and hip OA
without such comorbidity. All patients were comparable in age, sex and
duration of OA. We assessed serum cytokine levels (IL-1b, IL-6, IL-10,
IL-18), NO including adipokines such as adiponectin and leptin, C-
reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Various
symptoms of OA and mental health were measured using visual analog
scale (VAS), Functional Index for Hand Osteoarthritis (FIHOA),
WOMAC Knee/Hip, Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score
(KOOS), Hip injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (HOOS) and with
short-form 36 (SF-36), Psychological Health Questionnaire (PHQ9),
Coping Strategy Questionnaire (CSQ). We used U-Mann-Whitney test
S190
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
to detect differences between groups. Correlation was assessed using
Spearman correlation coefficient (rs).
Results: Patients with OA and obesity are characterized by the
prevalence of KOOS symptoms (median (Me) 61.1; interquartile range
(IQR) 55.5-69.4; р<0.001) and low values of mental health (SF-MH) (Me
52; IQR 44–64; р<0.001). Statistically significant differences in serum
cytokine levels were not found but correlation analysis identified the
relationships between clinical parameters and such cytokines as IL-1b,
IL-6, IL-10, IL-18 in OA patients with obesity. Some data are presented
(Table). Patients with OA and obesity had high leptin level (Me 54.7; IQR
32.5–64.1; р<0.001). Correlation analysis showed the relationships
between adiponectin level and physician’s global assessment (VAS)
(r=0.9, p=0.01), CRP and KOOS symptoms (r=0.8, p=0.04) in group
OA patients with obesity also.
Table. Correlations between clinical parameters and serum cytokine
levels in studied groups.
Conclusion: Such comorbidity as OA and obesity has clinical and
laboratory features of progression of OA. Such immunological factors
as serum cytokines concentrations, adipokines, CRP are linked with the
severity of obesity-associated OA. A different variation of correlations
may suppose role of this proinflammatory factors in the pathogenesis of
this OA phenotype. These data should be verified by larger studies.
P292
ULTRASOUND ASSESSMENT OF GOUT LESIONS IN AN
ALGERIAN POPULATION WITH ASYMPTOMATIC
HYPERURICEMIA
B. Bengana1, A. Ladjouze-Rezig2, N. Beramtane Raaf3, C. Aimeur4, S.
Ayoub5, A. Boukabous1, S. Lefkir - Tafiani1
1Rheumatology Dept - University Hospital of Benimessous,
2Rheumatology Dept - Specialized Hospital Establishment of
Benaknoune, 3Biochemistry Dept - Hospital of Bitraria, 4Radiolgy Dept
- University hospital of Mustapha Bacha, 5Internal Medicine Dept -
University Hospital of Benimessous, Algiers, Algeria
Objective: Hyperuricemia is a common biological abnormality, often
clinically asymptomatic. However, it can announce a gout and be linked
to many diseases such as metabolic syndrome, high blood pressure or
kidney disease. In fact, the majority of learned societies do not
recommend any urate lowering therapy (ULT) as long as the
hyperuricemia remains asymptomatic. But it turns out that part of the
population with asymptomatic hyperuricemia (AH) develops a gout after
a few years particularly with genetic predisposition, but also on certain
risk factors that need to be confirmed. By this way, musculoskeletal
ultrasound (MUS) can detect "asymptomatic gout" by visualizing signs
of urate deposits (UD) in subjects with AH. Our main objective is already
to estimate the prevalence of specific signs of gout in Algerian population
with AH and assess the factors exposing to UD.
Methods: This is a descriptive cross-sectional study from January 2017
to February 2019, with the recruitment of subjects with AH and serum
urate level > 60 mg/L, who do not take any ULT and have not associated
any chronic inflammatory rheumatism, where we performed a MUS of
the knees, metatarsophalangeal joints MTP1, MTP2 and
metacarpophalangeal joint MCP2 and MCP3 with the Achilles, patellar
and quadricipital tendons.
Results: We retained 258 subjects with AH, 132 women and 126 men
(sex ratio=0.95), the mean age was 59 y, the mean BMI was 28.4 kg/m2,
42 patients were under diuretics, 37 patients reported being on low-dose
of aspirin 100 mg daily. The mean rate of serum urate levels was 78±10
mg/L, the prevalence of UD found at the MUS was 22% (n=58), among
them 36% (21/58) had a sign of the double contour DC on the MTP1 and
29% (17/58) on the knee, 7% (4/58) had tophi on the MTP1 and 3%
(2/58) had urate aggregates. The factors reported to be linked to UD in
the sample were: the male gender (p=0.0016); the high uric acid level (p=
0.0355); BMI (p=0.0427); taking diuretics for women (p=0.0002).
Conclusion: Through this work, it is clear that elementary ultrasound
lesions related to gout disease are common in a population with AH
and concerned one fifth of subjects in our study with a higher risk in
men and subjects with obesity and high uric acid level, but also in women
taking diuretics. These results need to be enhanced with a randomized
controlled study in order to better determine the predisposing factors for
gout in any subject with AH.
P293
PREVALENCE OF SARCOPENIA IN ELDERLY PATIENTS
A D M I T T E D
T O
H O S P I T A L
W I T H
A C U T E
CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE
A. Gruzmanov1, S. Mazurenko1, O. Ilyina2
1Saint Petersburg State University, Saint George Hospital, 2Saint George
Hospital, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Objective: To define the muscle mass, muscle strength and prevalence of
pre- and sarcopenia in patients admitted to the hospital due to a new
ischemic stroke and a transitory ischemic attack (TIA).
Methods: 60 patients (35 women, 25 men, average age 72.9±11.6 y, 10
patients had TIA, 50 - ischemic stroke) were analyzed with bioelectrical
impedance analysis (BMI). Skeletal muscle mass index (SMMI) was
calculated as skeletal muscle mass (kg)/height (m)2. Muscle strength
was measured in all patients using a Jamar hand dynamometer.
Results: The cutoff values for SMMI were in conformity with the
consensus of EWGSOP1 (<10.76 kg/m2 in men, <6.76 kg/m2 in women).
Cutoff values for grip strength were according to EWGSOP2 (< 27 kg in
men, < 16 kg in women). In our study, the mean SMMI was 10.9±1.4 kg/
m2 (11.6±0.9 kg/m2 in males, 10.5±1.0 kg/m2 in females). All women
had muscle mass value higher than EWGSOP1 cutoff values. On the
contrary, 6 out of 25 males (24%) had decreased muscle mass. The mean
hand grip strength was 25.2±12.7 kg (36.8±10.2 kg in men, 16.9±4.4 kg
in women).According to the EWGSOP2 criteria 19 out of 35 women
(54%) and 6 men (24%) performed decreased muscle strength. In our
study, only 2 patients (both males) fulfilled criteria for sarcopenia
diagnosis, however 23 patients (predominantly females) were diagnosed
with presarcopenia due to reduced muscle strength and preserved muscle
mass.
Conclusion: The elderly patients with a new ischemic stroke or TIA
assessed with BMI and hand grip strength demonstrated low prevalence
of sarcopenia in our study (3.3%). Nevertheless 39.6% of patients (54%
of females) had decreased hand grip strength and can be considered as
presarcopenia patients.
P294
BONE MINERAL DENSITY STATUS AND PATHOLOGICAL
FRACTURES IN CHUVASH PATIENTS WITH NEWLY
DIAGNOSED PAGET'S DISEASE
I. B. Bashkova1, N. V. Bezlyudnaya2, N. S. Nikolaev1, V. U. Emelianov1
S191
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Center of Traumatology, Orthopedics and Arthroplasty, Chuvash State
University I.N. Ulyanov, 2Center of Traumatology, Orthopedics &
Arthroplasty, Cheboksary, Russia
Objective: This study was to evaluate BMD of the central parts of the
skeleton according to DXA and to conduct a retrospective assessment of
pathological fractures in patients with a newly diagnosed diagnosis of
Paget's disease (PD) the ethnic Chuvashia region of Russia where this
pathology is rear.
Methods: In the blood were studied the total calcium, phosphorus,
creatinine, alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The assessment of the BMD of
the lumbar spine (LI-LIV) and the proximal parts of both femurs was
performed by the DXA method.
Results: The new diagnosis of PD was establish in Regional Medical
Center from October 2011 to November 2020 in 21 patients (11 men, 10
women) with a mean aged 59.0±10.9 y. The diagnosis of PD was
established on average 7.6±5.3 y after the clinical manifestation. In 18
cases (85.7%) was diagnosed a polyostotic type of PD, and only 3 cases
monostotic type of the disease. PD was detected at the intermediate stage in
15 people (71.4%) or at the late stage in 6 people (28.6%). The activity of
alkaline phosphatase increase by 1.5-9.5 times with normal content of total
calcium (2.3±0.2 mmol/L), phosphorus (1.1±0.2 mmol/L) and creatinine
(88.3±21.9 mmol/L). According to the DXA, the average T-test values in
the lumbar spine were -3.16±1.93 CO, and in the proximal femur -2.18
±1.20 CO. Osteoporosis was detected in 78.6%, osteopenia-in 14.3% of
cases. More frequently PD affected pelvic bones (33.3%), femoral (38.1%)
and tibial (14.3%) bones, lower thoracic and lumbar spine (19.0%). 52.4%
of patients with PD had a history of pathological fractures. Compression
fractures of the vertebral bodies were found in 6 people, fractures of the
proximal femur in 5 people, pelvic bones in 1 person, surgical neck of the
humerus in 1 person. 6 out of 11 patients had a history of low-energy
multiple fractures history. Secondary coxarthrosis and/or gonarthrosis of
the third radiological stage was detected in 17 patients (81%).
Conclusion: All rear cases of PD in Chuvash were detected at the
advanced stages when complications of this disease have already
developed.
P295
POTENTIAL CLINICAL USEFULNESS OF BIOMARKERS IN
CURRENT MEDICAL APPLICATIONS
R. Amir1
1Centre de Santé des Fagnes Chimay, Chimay, Belgium
Objective: Biomarkers are potentially useful in the contexts of primary,
secondary and tertiary prevention. The main characteristics of an ideal
biomarker include that they are safe and easy to measure with a scientific
evidence to suggest that biomarker is any substance, structure or process
that can be measured in the body or its products and influence or predict
the incidence of outcome or disease (1,2). Additionally, variation in
biomarker levels with gender and ethnicity should be elucidated, and
the biomarker should have good performance characteristics. Risk
prediction scores can combine information from several different
biomarkers in order to estimate an individual’s risk of developing an
outcome, such as disease or death.
Methods: As reported in several publications, biomarkers are potentially
useful along several points of a disease continuum. They can be useful in
the context of primary prevention, for preventing disease itself.
Moreover, they can facilitate secondary prevention by the early detection
of disease via screening, detection of subclinical disease, and by helping
the monitoring of disease progression. Biomarkers are also useful for the
purpose of tertiary prevention, allowing guide treatment to avoid
morbidity owning to established disease (3).
Results: The most important aim of identifying biomarkers that can
accurately predict disease is to prevent disease in those at greatest risk
and to personalize treatment according to maximal potential patient
benefit. With the completion of the human genome project and the rapid
expansion of the “omics field (i.e., genomics, proteomics, metabolomics,
lipomics, ribomics and pharmacogenomics.
Conclusion: There is a growing interest in the field of biomarkers in most
subspecialties of medicine. Discrimination, calibration and risk
reclassification are the usual classical methods which allow to assess
the clinical utility of biomarkers, and each method has strengths and
weaknesses that should be considered when employed to assess a
biomarker.
References:
&
Lassere MN. Stat Methods Med Res 2008;17:303.
&
World Health Organization. Biomarkers in risk assessment: Validity
and validation. WHO 2001.
&
Vasan RS. Circulation 2006;113:2335.
P296
SARCOPENIC OBESITY AND FUNCTIONAL PROGNOSIS IN
WOMEN WITH SUBACUTE HIP FRACTURE: A SHORT-
TERM PROSPECTIVE STUDY
M. Di Monaco1, C. Castiglioni1, F. Bardesono2, E. Milano1, G.
Massazza2
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Division of Physical & Rehabilitation
Medicine, Presidio Sanitario San Camillo, Fondazione Opera San
Camillo, 2Division of Physical & Rehabilitation Medicine, Dept. of
Surgical Sciences, University, Torino, Italy
Objective: To evaluate the effect of sarcopenic obesity on ability to
function in women with subacute hip fracture.
Methods: We prospectively studied one sample of women with subacute
hip fracture. At admission to our rehabilitation hospital, we assessed grip
strength by a Jamar dynamometer and body composition by DXA.
Sarcopenia was defined according to the criteria released by
EWGSOP2 in 2019, with both grip strength <16 kg and appendicular
lean mass (aLM)/(height)2 <5.5 kg/m2. Alternatively, aLM <15 kg was
substituted for aLM/(height)2 <5.5 kg/m2 to define sarcopenia. Obesity
was diagnosed with fat mass exceeding 40% of total body mass. Ability
to function in activities of daily living was assessed by the Barthel index.
Results: We evaluated 183 of 200 women. Sarcopenic women had lower
Barthel index scores assessed at the end of subacute inpatient
rehabilitation (U=367,0; z=-3.8; P<0.001) and lower Barthel index
effectiveness (U=374.5; z=-3.68; P<0.001) than non-sarcopenic women.
Conversely, we found no significant differences in function between
obese and non-obese women. The concurrent presence of sarcopenia
and obesity did not worsen the functional prognosis vs. the presence of
isolated sarcopenia. After adjustment for Barthel index scores before
rehabilitation, age, hip-fracture type and cognitive impairment,
sarcopenia was significantly associated with Barthel index scores
(P=0.008) and Barthel index effectiveness (P=0.004), whereas obesity
was not. The results did not materially change when aLM <15 kg was
substituted for aLM/(height)2 <5.5 kg/m2 to confirm sarcopenia in the
women whose hand grip strength was <16 kg.
Conclusion: The concurrent presence of obesity did not worsen the
negative prognostic role of sarcopenia in the short-term recovery of
ability to function in women with subacute hip fracture.
P297
A S S O C I A T I O N B E T W E E N S A R C O P E N I A A N D
OSTEOPOROSIS IN SUBACUTE HIP FRACTURE: A CROSS-
SECTIONAL STUDY OF 262 WOMEN
M. Di Monaco1, C. Castiglioni1, F. Bardesono2, M. Freiburger2, E.
Milano1, G. Massazza2
S192
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Division of Physical & Rehabilitation
Medicine, Presidio Sanitario San Camillo, Fondazione Opera San
Camillo, 2Division of Physical & Rehabilitation Medicine, Dept. of
Surgical Sciences, University, Torino, Italy
Objective: To assess the association between sarcopenia and
osteoporosis in women with a fragility fracture of the hip.
Methods: We studied 262 of 290 women with subacute hip fracture. A
scan by DXA was performed to assess body composition. A Jamar
dynamometer was used to measure hand grip strength. Sarcopenia was
diagnosed with both hand grip strength <16 kg and appendicular lean
mass (aLM) <15 kg, according to the EWGSOP2 criteria released in
2019. Osteoporosis was identified with low femoral BMD (threshold
fixed at 2.5 SD below the mean of the young reference population).
Results: Osteoporosis was found in 189 of the 262 women (72%; 95%CI
from 67% to 78%) whereas sarcopenia in 147 of the 262 (56%; 95%CI
from 50% to 62%). The unadjusted odds ratio to have osteoporosis for a
sarcopenic woman was 2.93 (95%CI from 1.69 to 5.19, P<0.001). After
adjustment for age, time interval between fracture and DXA scan and
body fat percentage the odds ratio was 2.30 (95%CI from 1.27 to 4.14;
P=0.006). Data did not materially change after substituting BMI for body
fat percentage among the independent variables in the regression model:
the adjusted odds ratio to have osteoporosis for a sarcopenic woman
became 1.94 (95%CI from 1.05 to 3.56; P=0.033).
Conclusion: We show a positive association between sarcopenia and
osteoporosis in 262 women with a fragility fracture of the hip. We
contribute to the concept of tight links between bones and muscles in the
poorly investigated population of older women with a fragility fracture of
the hip. It is noteworthy that the EWGSOP2 sarcopenia definition can
successfully capture the women with concomitant osteoporosis.
P298
INCREASED PSYCHOLOGICAL STRAIN AMONG
ORTHOPAEDIC HEALTHCARE WORKERS IS ASSOCIATED
WITH LONGER WORKING HOURS AND HAS POTENTIAL
IMPACTS ON FAMILY RELATED ADJUSTMENTS
K. C. Wong1, K. X. K. Tay1, P. D/O Vas Dev Bajaj1, M. A. Png2, N. N.
Lo1, A. K. Mitra1, J. S. B. Koh1, T. S. Howe1
1Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, 2Dept. of
Diagnostic Radiology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore
Objective: To investigate the psychological strain experienced by
orthopaedic healthcare workers and attributing factors during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods: We surveyed healthcare workers in an outpatient
musculoskeletal clinic with a questionnaire based on the validated
Caregiver Strain Index1. We have previously shown the prevalence of
psychological strain during the pre-peak phase of the pandemic.2 The
same group was followed up 6 months later (post-peak phase) to evaluate
the downstream psychological strain.
Results: Of the 57 participants who were followed up, 30 (52·6%)
experienced a greater level of strain (Group A), similar to the prevalence
in our previous study (51·6%). Significantly, participants in Group A
work longer hours per day compared to Group B (8.8±1.6 vs. 8.0±1.5;
mean difference, 0.8; 95%CI, 0.0 to 1.6; p=0.043). “Family adjustments”
(84.2%) garnered the most positive responses.
Conclusion: Longer working hours contributes to psychological strain
and measures should be designed to mitigate this. Potential impact on
family life of healthcare workers is an unrecognised toll which should
receive more attention. Health ministries should ensure measures to
safeguard the mental health of healthcare workers to avoid reactive
strategies during a pandemic.
References:
1.
Sullivan M. J Gerontol Nurs 2002;28:4.
2.
Wong K, et al. J Orthop Surg Res 2020;15:322.
P299
MANAGING A FLS IN A BRAZILIAN HEALTHCARE
PROVIDER DURING COVID'S PANDEMIC
B. Stolnicki1, L. Silva2
1PREVREFRAT, 2Fiosaúde, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Objective: Fiosaúde is a healthcare provider that has approximately
15,000 beneficiaries. 27% of them are over 60 y of age. In January of
2015 we started an FLS (PREVREFRAT) in the Fiosaúde Clinic. Men
and women over 50 y of age with a history of fragility fractures were
referred. From 2016, patients with a high risk of fractures (BMD <2.5 SD
in the lumbar spine or neck or total femur) were referred without previous
fractures. The objective of this presentation is to demonstrate the cost-
effectiveness of FLS in this environment comparing the years 2019 and
2020 (pandemic).
Methods: 119 patients participating in the FLS were evaluated in the
years 2019 and 2020. 109 women and 10 men, aged between 53-96 y
(mean 74 y). 44 patients were treated with zoledronic acid 5 mg, 54 with
denosumab 60 mg, 1 with ibandronate and 20 with calcium and vitamin
D (12 zoledronic acid drug holiday). Subsequent fracture outcome and
costs were compared during the years 2019 and 2020. Usually, patients
using zoledronic acid were infused at home and patients received
denosumab during regular visits. With the advent of the pandemic,
denosumab patients also started to receive it at home. There was great
concern about the rebound effect due to the suspension or delay in the
application of denosumab. No patient was delayed for more than 30 days.
In patients using zoledronic acid, due to the characteristics of the drug,
greater tolerance was allowed. Communication tools such as
telemedicine, e-mail and phone calls were widely used in the monitoring
and scheduling of patients.
Results: In 2019 there were 3 subsequent fractures and 1 subsequent
fracture in 2020. In this environment the cost of a fragility fracture is
$10500. The annual cost (including medical fees, medication and
laboratory and imaging tests) in 2019 was US $42056 and US $47726
in 2020 (US $5670 difference). The isolated cost of home application of
denosumab was US $1481.20. 53.8 fractures were avoided in 2019 and
54.74 in 2020, generating savings of US $56510 in 2019 and US $57470
in 2020 (difference of US $9660).
Conclusion: Adequate planning and concentrated efforts, especially by
the Nursing team, allowed the FLS to function following their
effectiveness and safety protocols, respecting their deadlines in such an
S193
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
atypical and risky moment. Despite rising costs to face the challenges
posed by the pandemic, the FLS in the healthcare provider environment
has proved to be highly cost-effective.
P300
INDICATIONS OF CYCLIC ANTI-PEPTIDE CITRULIN
ANTIBODIES: EXPERIENCE OF THE RHEUMATOLOGY
DEPARTMENT
A. A. Ibovi Mouondayi1, N. Kawtar1, S. Janani1
1CHU Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti CCP) is
known to be a useful marker for the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA). Its specificity for rheumatoid arthritis is reported to be 89-98%, is
of particular interest as it is higher than all other serological markers
reported previously. Recently, the additional usefulness of anti CCP as
a predictor of joint destruction has attracted attention. In contrast to its
specificity in RA, the positivity of anti CCP can be seen in other diseases.
Methods: A retrospective, descriptive study of records of patients with a
positive anti CCP in rheumatology department over a period of 32 months
from January 2018 to August 2020.
Inclusion criteria: all patients who were requested and found to be anti
CCP positive, they were all tested in the same laboratory. Exclusion
criteria: all patients with negative anti CCP.
Results: There were 67 patients, 59 women and 8 men, with a sex ratio
M/F of 0.13. The average age of the patients was 52 y, with extremes
ranging from 33-81 y. Diabetes and hypertension were the most common
comorbidities in 25% of the patients. Joint signs included inflammatory
articular pain and arthritis. Biological inflammatory syndrome was
present in >62%. RA was retained in 49 patients, 9 psoriatic arthritis, 6
Sjögren’s syndrome and 3 for other connective tissue diseases.
Conclusion: Our data illustrate that anti CCP antibodies can be linked to
joint damage not only in RA but also in other rheumatic diseases.
Recently, some studies have reported the relationship between the
presence of anti CCP antibodies and joint damage in non-RA diseases.
Gottenberg and colleagues in a work on Sjögren’s syndrome, reported
that 7.5% of patients with anti CCP(+). These findings in the literature,
are fully consistent with our results. Indeed, RA was the predominant
diagnosis in our series followed by rheumatic psoriasis. However, our
results, as well as others reported in the literature, suggest that anti CCP
may be useful as a marker of joint inflammation not only in RA but also in
others.
From this work it appears that the positivity
of anti CCP is not
pathognomonic to RA, other pathologies mentioned above may be
associated. Therefore, it would be wise that further studies concerning
anti CCP in non-RA diseases should clarify this issue.
P301
RETROSPECTİVE COMPARISON OF THE EFFECT OF IL-17
BLOCKER THERAPY AND ANTI-TNF AGENT THERAPY ON
B O N E
M N E R A L
D E N S T Y
I N
A X I A L
SPONDYLOARTROPATHY PATENTS
N. Ferhatlar1, E. Demirhan1, S. Kanyılmaz1, S. Atar1, O. Kuru1
1University of Health Sciences, Prof. Dr. Cemil Tascioglu City Hospital,
Dept. of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: Axial spondyloarthropathy (AxSpA) is a chronic
inflammatory disease of the axial skeleton characterized by inflammatory
low back pain. Osteopenia and osteoporosis may accompany since the
early stages of the disease. TNFα, which plays a key role in
inflammation, is also an osteoclast activator. Anti-TNFα agents and IL-
17 blockers used in AxSpA treatment, which have been used in recent
years, have positive effects on BMD in patients with AxSpA by reducing
inflammation. This study was conducted to compare the BMD measured
by DXA in patients with AxSpA under anti-TNFα and IL-17 blockers
treatment.
Methods: 66 patients who have been diagnosed with AxSpA according
to the 2009 Assessment in SpondyloArthritis International Society
(ASAS) criteria were involved in our study. 27 of 66 patients were treated
with anti-TNFα and 39 patients were treated with IL-17 blocker
(secukinumab). All patients’ sociodemographic data, medications,
anteroposterior lomber, femur neck and femur total DXA values (BMD,
T-score and Z-score) taken at the beginning of the study and 1-y later
were evaluated. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive
9rotein (CRP) and 25(OH)vitD levels results were evaluated. Bath
Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index (BASDAI) and Bath
Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index (BASFI) values, which are
disease activity and function indicators, were evaluated at the beginning
and after 1 y. Outcome values were compared between those receiving
IL-17 blocker therapy and anti-TNFα agent therapy.
Results: In this study, 66 patients were included for evaluation. (37.8% of
them were women (n:25) and 62.1% of them were men (n:41)). Average
duration of disease was 5.3±2.7 y (range: 1-12 y). Patients' clinical data
were similar in patients treated with both anti-TNF and IL-17 blocker.
Statistically significant negative correlation was detected between patients’
age and femur total BMD values (r: -0.298 p:0.015). The mean lumbar
region (L2-L4) BMD value of the patients was 1.07±0.29 and femoral neck
BMD value was 0.93±0.27. In patients using both anti-TNF and IL17
blockers, a statistically significant increase was found in the lumbar region
(L1-L4, L2-L4), femoral neck and femur total BMD after 1 y of
observation (p<0.05). In patients using anti-TNF, an increase of 9.5% in
lumbar (L2-L4) BMD and a 1.6% increase in femoral neck BMD was
found. In patients using IL-17 blocker, there was a 5.1% increase in lumbar
(L2-L4) BMD and a 1.1% increase in femoral neck BMD. Compared to
patients using anti-TNF, the rate of increase in femur total BMD was higher
in patients using IL-17 blocker (p=0.013). Patients who were previously
treated with another biological drug (anti-TNF agent) had a higher rate of
increase in BMD at the end of 1 y than naïve patients (p<0.01).
Conclusion: BMD decreases in time in AxSpA patients due to
inflammation. Pharmacological treatments that suppress inflammation,
such as anti-TNFα and IL-17 blockers, have been found to increase bone
mineral density values as well as ceasing the loss of in bone mineral
density. The positive effect of IL-17 blockers on femur total bone mineral
density was determined more than anti-TNFα agents.
P302
RENAL SAFETY OF ZOLEDRONIC ACID IN PATIENTS WITH
BORDERLINE KIDNEY FUNCTION AT A METABOLIC BONE
CENTRE IN THE UK
M. Schini1, N. Peel2, L. Toronjo-Urquiza3, E. Thomas4, S. Salam5, A.
Khwaja5, R. Eastell1, J. Walsh1
1Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, 2Sheffield Teaching
Hospitals, 3Chemical Engineering Dept., University of Sheffield,
4Pharmacy, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, 5Sheffield Kidney Institute,
Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, Sheffield, UK
Objective: Zoledronic acid is a bisphosphonate widely used for the
treatment of osteoporosis that leads to improvements in bone mineral
density and reductions in fractures. A potential side effect is nephrotoxicity
and acute kidney injury (AKI). Advice from the UK Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in 2019 stated that
creatinine clearance (CrCl) and not estimated glomerular rate (eGFR)
should be used to guide and make decisions about treatment and that
patients should not receive zoledronic acid if their CrCl is below 35 ml/
min. The objective of this study was to review the safety of our previous
practice using eGFR and the clinical impact of implementing the MHRA
recommendations.
Methods: The study was performed at the Metabolic Bone Centre
(MBC) in Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, UK. Data on all the patients
S194
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
who had zoledronic acid infusions from 1/09/2015 to 1/10/2020 at the
center were retrieved and evaluated.
Results: Data on 4405 patients were retrieved. Serum creatinine in the 14
days post-infusion was available for a total of 969 infusions and amongst
them, 160 (16%) infusions were given with baseline CrCl <35 ml/min.
AKI was observed within 14 days following 45 infusions (4.5%). Only 9
infusions resulted in AKI with a pre-treatment of CrCl <35 ml/min. If the
MHRA rules had been followed (calculating CrCl for patients aged ≥75 y
and/or extreme BMI <18 or >40 kg/m2), 996 infusions with baseline CrCl
<35 ml/min would not have been given. Logistic regression showed that
both CrCl and eGFR were significant factors in predicting AKI within 14
days, but that the currently recommended cutoff of CrCl 35 ml/min had
poor sensitivity. The areas under the curve for each marker were 0.608 and
0.627, respectively, suggesting that neither are sensitive in predicting AKI.
Conclusion: This study suggested that zoledronic acid could be
contributing to the development of AKI in some patients. Estimated
GFR is better validated than CrCl and so is preferable to use. Since low
eGFR is at least as good a predictor of AKI as CrCl, it should be used in
everyday clinical practice.
P303
A NEW WEARABLE TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL
NERVE STIMULATION DEVICE IS MORE EFFICIENT AND
BETTER TOLERATED THAN WEAK OPIOIDS IN THE
TREATMENT OF KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS PAIN
E. Maheu1, S. Soriot-Thomas2, E. Noël3, H. Ganry4, E. Lespessailles5, B.
Cortet6
1Saint Antoine Hospital, Paris, 2CHU Amiens Picardie, Amiens, 3Santy
Orthopaedic Center, Lyon, 4Herganconsulting4U, Amiens, 5Orleans
Hospital, Orleans, 6CHU Lille, Lille, France
Objective: To compare the analgesic efficacy and safety of a new
wearable transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (W-TENS) to weak
opioids (WO) in the treatment of moderate to severe, nociceptive, chronic
pain in knee osteoarthritis (KOA) patients.
Methods: ArthroTENS study is a noninferiority, multicentric,
prospective, randomized, single-blinded for primary efficacy outcome,
controlled, 2-parallel groups, clinical study comparing W-TENS to WO
over a 3-month controlled period with an additional optional
noncontrolled 3-month follow-up in W-TENS group. Patients had KOA
(ACR criteria) with baseline pain intensity (PI) ≥4 on a numerical rating
scale (NRS), after failure to level 1 analgesics/NSAIDs, a Kellgren-
Lawrence grade ≥2 and were assessed at baseline, month 1 and month
3. The co-primary outcomes were KOA PI at 3-month and the number of
adverse events (AEs) over 3 months. Secondary outcomes included
WOMAC function, EuroQol, responder rates defined by PI reduction
≥30 and ≥50% and OMERACT-OARSI response criteria. The
noninferiority margin was defined as 0.825 on PI reduction.
Results: The noninferiority of W-TENS was demonstrated in both the per
protocol (PP) and intent-to treat (ITT) populations. At M3, PI in PP
population was 3.87 (2.12) compared to 4.66 (2.37) (delta: -0.79 (0.44);
95%CI (-1.65; 0.08)) in W-TENS and WO groups, respectively. A
planned superiority analysis performed, demonstrated that W-TENS
was significantly superior to WO at M3 (p=0.0124). At M3, PI reduction
in W-TENS group reached the absolute minimal clinically important
difference: -2.1 (2.3) on the NRS (equivalent to -20 mm on a 0-100 visual
analog scale), which means being "much better". In the WO group, only a
1.1 (2.1) PI reduction was observed at M3, which means being "slightly
better". OMERACT-OARSI responders were 54.5% in W-TENS group
compared to 32.7% in WO group (p=0.021). The number of AEs was
significantly lower (p<0.001) in W-TENS group (n=7) than in WO
(n=36) group.
Conclusion: W-TENS was more effective and better tolerated than WO
in the treatment of nociceptive KOA chronic pain and could represent an
interesting non-pharmacological alternative to WO or NSAIDs.
Acknowledgement: This study was supported by SUBLIMED France,
actiTENS® manufacturer (W-TENS used in this study).
P304
BILATERAL FATIGUE ILIAC FRACTURE IN A MILITARY
CADET: A UNIQUE CASE
C. Koutserimpas1, S. Naoum1, I. Chamakioti1, K. Raptis1, K. Alpantaki2,
T. Koureta1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, “251” Hellenic Air Force
General Hospital of Athens, 2Dept. of Orthopaedics & Traumatology,
“Venizeleion” General Hospital of Heraklion, Crete, Greece
Objective: To describe a unique case of a bilateral iliac fatigue fracture in
a young male air force cadet during the routine military training program.
Methods: The clinical, radiologic and laboratory findings, as well as the
clinical course of the patient are presented.
Results: A 18-year-old male Greek air force cadet presented to the
Emergency Dept. of “251” Hellenic Air Force General Hospital due to
persistent pain in both hip joints, 3 weeks after he started basic combat
training in the academy. His medical history was unremarkable. Plain X-
ray views revealed a radiolucent line at the right iliac bone, while MRI
showed bilateral bone marrow edema. The biochemical markers and bone
densitometry scan in lumbar spine and left hip were normal. Based on the
radiological and biochemical findings the diagnosis of fatigue bilateral
iliac fractures was established. The patient followed conservative
treatment with partial weight bearing using crutches and the symptoms
disappeared after a 3-month period.
Conclusion: Stress fractures are common in military population.
Diagnosis is challenging, since the majority of them is asymptomatic
and presenting with normal radiographic images (X-ray, CT). MRI is
the method of choice for early diagnosis and precise assessment of
regional osseous morphology and surrounding soft tissues. The
appropriate treatment is based upon the distinction of a fatigue from an
insufficiency fracture through the assessment of bone metabolism and
patient’s medical history. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge,
the present case is unique, since no other bilateral fatigue iliac fracture
has been reported in the literature so far. It is of paramount importance to
report such cases, in order to raise the awareness of physicians and to
better understand this clinical entity.
P305
FATIGUE SACRAL FRACTURES: A CASE SERIES
A. Tsatsaragkou1, K. Vlasis1, S. Naoum2, I. Chamakioti2, K. Raptis2, A.
Mari3, K. Alpantaki4, C. Koutserimpas2
1Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, 2Dept. of Orthopaedics &
Traumatology, “251” Hellenic Air Force General Hospital of Athens,
Athens, 3Dept. of Internal Medicine, “251” Hellenic Air Force General
Hospital of Athens, Athens, 4Dept. of Orthopaedics & Traumatology,
“Venizeleion” General Hospital of Heraklion, Crete, Heraklion, Greece
Objective: Fatigue sacral fractures (FSFs) are rare, since only a few
reports have been described so far, and often misdiagnosed due to clinical
entities with similar symptomatology. This study presents a case series of
FSFs, regarding imaging and management, aiming to increase the
awareness of physicians for these injuries in cases of low-back and/or
pelvic pain in young active patients.
Methods: The present is an 9-y retrospective observational study of a
prospectively maintained database. Patients’ demographics, fracture site
and type, type of sports activity, duration of symptomatology prior to
diagnosis, imaging, management, duration of symptomatology after
diagnosis, history of fatigue fractures and follow-up were evaluated from
the medical records.
Results: Six cases (4 females), suffering from 8 fractures (since 2 patients
suffered bilateral sacral fractures) with mean age=29.8 y were studied.
S195
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Two patients had suffered another fatigue fracture in the past. Mean
symptoms’ duration prior diagnosis was 7.5 weeks (SD=3.5), while mean
symptoms’ duration after diagnosis was 10.3 weeks (SD=10.2). In most
cases (5), MRI revealed the fracture. According to the Kaeding-Miller
classification; five fractures were type III, two IV and one II. All patients
were treated conservatively, with rest and analgesics, while three received
vitamin D and calcium.
Conclusion: FSFs are often misdiagnosed; therefore, detailed medical
history, as well as clinical examination are of utmost importance and
FSFs should be included in the differential diagnosis for chronic low
back-or-hip pain in young patients engaging in sports, especially female
runners. History of other fatigue injuries seems to be a predisposing
factor. It is of paramount importance to obtain advanced imaging,
including MRI, early in the workup for identifying a sacral fatigue
fracture and preventing worsening of the injury.
P306
FUNGAL PROSTHETIC JOINT INFECTION IN REVISED
ARTHROPLASTY
C. Koutserimpas1, I. Chamakioti1, S. Naoum1, K. Alpantaki2, K.
Dretakis3, K. Raptis1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, “251” Hellenic Air Force
General Hospital of Athens, Athens, 2Dept. of Orthopaedics &
Traumatology, “Venizeleion” General Hospital of Heraklion, Crete,
Heraklion, 32nd Dept. of Orthopaedics, "Hygeia" General Hospital of
Athens, Athens, Greece
Objective: To describe a case of a fungal prosthetic joint infection (PJI)
in revised knee arthroplasty in 70-year-old female, two years following
initial reconstruction surgery.
Methods: The clinical and laboratory findings, as well as the clinical
course of the patient are presented.
Results: A 70-year-old female, with medical history remarkable for
hypertension, diabetes mellitus and obesity, underwent 2-stage exchange
knee arthroplasty due to PJI. The cultures from the first stage surgery
yielded a methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA). Five days following
the second stage of the reconstruction surgery the wound was purulent.
The patient underwent surgical debridement, while new intraoperative
cultures were obtained. Cultures revealed Candida albicans and
MRSA, while blood cultures yielded the same C. albicans. The patient
was commenced on iv fluconazole and vancomycin for 3 weeks. She
refused further surgical treatment and continued life-long per os
suppression with fluconazole. At follow-up 3 years after discharge, she
has no symptoms or signs of an infection.
Conclusion: Fungal prosthetic joint infections are rare. They represent a
challenging to treat clinical entity, requiring multidisciplinary approach.
The combination of two-stage revision arthroplasty and prolonged period
of antifungal treatment seems to be the optimal management. This report
raises the question whether life-long fungal suppression is a feasible
option is cases that further surgery may lead to failure, either due to
technical difficulties (extensive bone loss, challenging reconstructive
options) or to high patient’s comorbidities. It is understood that definitive
infection’s eradication has not been achieved, however, the patient is
mobile without signs of infection.
P307
PREGNANCY-ASSOCIATED OSTEOPOROTIC VERTEBRAL
FRACTURES: A REPORT OF TWO CASES
C. Koutserimpas1, K. Chaniotakis2, I. Chamakioti1, K. Raptis1, A. Mari3,
S. Naoum1, K. Dretakis4, K. Alpantaki2
1Dept. of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, “251” Hellenic Air Force
General Hospital of Athens, Athens, 2Dept. of Orthopaedics &
Traumatology, “Venizeleion” General Hospital of Heraklion, Crete,
Heraklion, 3Dept. of Internal Medicine, “251” Hellenic Air Force
General Hospital of Athens, Athens, 42nd Dept. of Orthopaedics,
"Hygeia" General Hospital of Athens, Athens, Greece
Objective: To describe two rare cases of pregnancy- associated
osteoporosis (PAO) related vertebral compression fractures.
Methods: The clinical, radiologic and laboratory findings, as well as the
clinical course and the treatment of the patients are presented.
Results: Two young females, in the early postpartum period, presented to
the outpatient orthopaedic clinic due to acute back pain. Their medical
history was unremarkable. MRI revealed vertebral compression fractures,
in both cases. The fractures were localized in the thoracolumbar spine.
According to the clinical symptoms, laboratory examinations and
imaging characteristics, the diagnosis of pathologic fractures secondary
to PAO was established. Both presented cases had vitamin D deficiency.
Treatment included a spine- orthosis, cessation of breastfeeding, per os
supplementation of vitamin D and calcium, while one case also received
teriparatide. During the follow-up, both patients were free of symptoms
and returned to their previous activities.
Conclusion: PAO is a rare disorder affecting women during the last
trimester of pregnancy or during the early postpartum period.
Pregnancy related osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures (OVCF)
occur due to a combination of metabolic and mechanical factors. OVCF
should be considered in the differential diagnosis in women at the last
trimester of pregnancy or early postpartum period with acute back pain.
The conservative treatment is considered successful for the cases
presented in this report.
P308
BONE HEALTH TELEECHO MOSCOW: RESULTS OF TWO-
YEAR ECHO PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION IN THE RUSSIAN
FEDERATION
Z. Belaya1, G. Melnichenko1, O. Golounina2, T. Tsoriev1, L.
Rozhinskaya1, T. Dubovitskaya1, I. Belovalova1, E. Gorochov1, M.
Shestakova1, I. Dedov1, M. Lewiecki3
1The National Medical Research Centre for Endocrinology, Moscow,
Russia, 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University of the
Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation (Sechenov University),
Moscow, Russia, 3Bone Health TeleECHO, UNM Health Sciences
Center, Albuquerque, USA
Objective: Bone Health TeleECHO Moscow was launched on
November 27, 2018. It is the first Russian speaking ECHO project that
replicates the original Bone Health TeleECHO, with participation by
healthcare professionals from across Russia and other Russian-speaking
countries. This study aimed to evaluate the impact of 2-y Bone Health
TeleECHO Moscow on physicians’ knowledge in management of bone
disease.
Methods: In order to assess Bone Health TeleECHO Moscow outcomes,
we used a blinded self-efficacy questionnaire focusing on competence
and skills in 20 domains of osteoporosis care before and after each year
of participation in the Bone Health TeleECHO Moscow project with a
scale of 1 to 7 (1 – no skills; 7 – expert level). Demographic data such as
age, gender, specialization, degree and main employment were collected
through the questionnaire. The questionnaire was sent at the end of 2019
and 2020 with a request to complete if at least three ECHO programmes
were attended. The data are summarized for 2 y.
Results: Over the 2 y, 244 participants completed the questionnaire.
Average attendance for each session increased from 64 in 2019 to 80 in
2020. Participation was from all regions of Russia and Russian-speaking
countries such as Kazakhstan, Belarus, Moldova and Armenia. The mean
age of our respondents was 43 y with the youngest being 23 and eldest 74.
Participants' primary specialties were endocrinology (n=214, 87.7%),
gynecology (n=19, 7.8%), nephrology (n=2, 0.8%), orthopedics (n=2,
0.8%) and other (n=7, 2.9%). All of our participants were MD, in addition
S196
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
to this there were 56 MD, PhD. Most of the physicians were employed in
state-owned outpatient clinics, however 57 participants were employed in
private outpatient clinics and 23 participants worked in the National
Medical Centers. According to the results of the questionnaire,
statistically significant improvement was observed in all evaluated fields
with an effect size of 0.82.
Conclusion: Bone Health TeleECHO replication in Russia has proven to
be effective at improving clinicians' skills in the management of
osteoporosis and other bone diseases.
P309
DENOSUMAB FOR THE TREATMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS IN
PATIENTS WITH RENAL INSUFFICIENCY WITH AND
WITHOUT PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
S. Gronskaya1, L. Rozhinskaya1, E. Mamedova1, M. Vorotsova1, G.
Melnichenko1, Z. Belaya1
1The National Medical Research Centre for Endocrinology, Moscow,
Russia
Objective: To determine the safety and efficacy of denosumab in
individuals with mild-to-moderate chronic kidney disease (CKD)
(glomerular filtration rate (GFR) <60 ml/min/1.73 m2) in patients with
primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT)-related osteoporosis and primary
postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMO).
Methods: We enrolled patients over 50 y of age with mild to moderate
kidney failure (GFR 30-60 ml/min/1.73 m2) with and without PHPT and
a control group with GFR >60 ml/min/1.73 m2 with and without PHPT.
All patients had verified osteoporosis (based on BMD T-score ≤-2.5 SD
and/or low-trauma fracture) and had at least 3 injections of denosumab.
BMD, markers of bone turnover serum levels of calcium and adverse
events (AEs) were evaluated from baseline to the final outcome.
Results: 145 patients, 69±9 years old were included in the study. Among
them were patients with PHPT-related osteoporosis and CKD [(n=22);
calcium – 2.63 (2.51-2.72) mmol/l; GFR – 43.7 (32.8-54.3) ml/min/1.73
m2]; patients with PHPT-related osteoporosis without CKD [(n=38);
calcium – 2.60 (2.5-2.75) mmol/l; GFR 77.5 (71.5-84.9) ml/min/1.73
m2]; postmenopausal women with osteoporosis (PMO) and CKD
[(n=17); calcium – 2.36 (2.26-2.47) mmol/l; GFR – 50.4 (44.3-53.4)
ml/min/1.73 m2] and patients with PMO without CKD [(n= 64) calcium
– 2.42 (2.3-2.47) mmol/l; GFR – 79.7 (71.8-86.3) ml/min/1.73 m2].
Among all patients denosumab treatment significantly increased BMD
and decreased serum levels of calcium and bone turnover markers
compared to baseline evaluation. In patients with PHPT-related
osteoporosis and CKD: the median increase in BMD according to the
T-score was L1-L4 0.65 (p<0.001), femoral neck 0.3 (p=0.012); radius
33% 0.2 (p<0.05), serum calcium levels decreased -0.24 (p<0.001).
PHPT-related osteoporosis without CKD: the median increase in BMD
according to the T-score was L1-L4 0.65 (p<0.001), femoral neck 0.2
(p<0.001); radius 33% 0.3 (p=0.013), serum calcium levels declined -
0.08 (p<0.001). In patients with PMO and CKD, denosumab increased
BMD in the lumbar spine L1-L4 0.5 (p<0.001), femoral neck 0,02
(p=0.8); serum calcium decreased -0.04 (p=0.4). In subjects with PMO
without CKD: the median increase in BMD according to the T-score was
L1-L4 0.6 (p<0.001), femoral neck 0.2 (p<0.001), serum calcium
decreased -0.04 (p=0,02). A marked decline in levels of serum calcium
was noted among patients with PHPT and GFR less than 60 ml/min/1.73
m2 (median Δ Са serum= 0,24 p<0,001), compared to patients with
PHPT without CKD (median Δ Са serum=0.08, p<0.001) and all others
subjects. Most participants with baseline CKD remained within the same
CKD subgroup at study completion; less than 5% progressed to CKD
stage 4. The percentage of participants reporting AEs was similar among
participants without CKD.
Conclusion: Denosumab treatment is similarly effective at increasing
BMD and decreasing bone turnover markers in patients with PMO and
PHPT among postmenopausal women. Calcium lowering effects of
denosumab are most significant in patients with PHPT and CKD. The
safety of denosumab did not differ among participants with and without
CKD.
P310
PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF A COMPLEX PROGRAM: CARE
FOR METABOLIC STATE OF MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
– A KEY TO LONG-LIFE INDEPENDENCE IN PATIENTS
WITH OSTEOPOROSIS AND OSTEOPENIA
P. Novosad1, P. Hrdý1, P. Fojtík2
1Mediekos Ambulance s.r.o., Osteology Centre Zlín, Osteology
Academy Zlín o.p.s;, Zlín, 2Centre for Digestive System Care, AGEL
Hospital Ostrava-Vítkovice, Ostrava-Vítkovice, Czech Republic
Objective: Ever since the times of ancient physicians and surgeons like
Sushruta (600 BC) or Hippocrates (400 BC), it is clear that physical
development of individuals with sedentary lifestyle is different from the
one of the physically active individuals. Only after the year 2000, with the
first discovery of causality of IL-6 and muscular movement, an intensive
study of this problematics has begun. Currently, there are about 600
known operations (myokins) that are interrelated with muscle functions.
Muscular tissue interrelates with others mechanistically, but it also forms
humoral harmony in which the muscular tissue has a dominant and
determining role. This phenomenon is relevant for pathophysiology of
chronical low-grade inflammation, muscle loss, origin and development
of noncommunicable diseases. These cause approx. 75% of deaths in
population. Solution of this problem has been considerably affecting
cost-effectivity in the health care system today and thus the state economy
as well. Therapeutic recommendations together with the whole health
care strategy need to be adjusted according to the above mentioned
findings, including the patients with osteoporosis and osteopenia. There
are, so far, no known suitable medicaments which would be used for
solving problematics of muscular loss. This is a reason why more
attention needs to be paid to the recommended physical regime (150
min/week, according to WHO) and dietary regime (basic diet + proteins).
We have built a complex diagnostic and therapeutic program for our
patients. Definition of pathological values follows EWGSOP and WHO.
Methods: Patient cohorts: Osteoporosis 60-70 y, 70-80 y, osteopenia 60-
70 y and 70-80 y. Control group for osteopenia 60-80 y. We followed
information about the control group during the COVID-19 time period,
particularly their physical activity regime.
1) Instructions for patients used to be delivered in a form of lectures for
different age groups. Now, during the COVID-19 time period,
instructions are provided individually.
2) SarQol (Sarcopenia and Quality of Life) questionnaire (Beaudart
2015). Czech version used with agreement from sarqol.org. Assessment
is now done individually only.
3) Measuring hand-grip is standardised according to Southampton
protocol with a dynamometer Jamar. Values of 20 kg are found
pathological (female values).
4) Determination of BMI, according to WHO, the border figure is 25 or
30 kg/m2.
5) DXA method determination of selective muscle index as a measure for
muscle mass. ALM/Ht2 for age above 60 y, border value for sarcopenia is
≤5.45 kg/m2.
6) From laboratory examinations we aimed at IL-6 and CRP(hs) - these
are not a subject of this report.
Results:
Osteoporosis
n
Age
BMI
ALT/Ht2
Hand grip
T-score
60-70
16
68.6
22
5.56
23.4
-2.5
70-80
22
73.7
22.6
5.79
17.0
-2.9
Osteopenia
n
Age
BMI
ALT/Ht2
Hand grip
T-score
S197
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
60-70
28
67.4
25.2
6.06
21.2+
-1.1
70-80
36
73.8
27.3+
6.2
21.5+
-1.6
Control group
17
71.9
25.4
6.55+
24.6++
-1.2
Statistically relevant findings:0.05+ 0.001++
DXA:LSC-1.5%
Conclusion: We have been running a physical activity and dietary
program for our patients for more than 2 y. Physical activity is aimed at
150 min/week (WHO) and basic diet aims at the Mediterranean type +
protein saturation, considerable stress is given to whey proteins enriched
with Leucin. Patients have been instructed. Due to adherence to this
regime we are able to report on statistically relevant changes in muscle
power and also in complex muscle mass, even during the current
pandemic situation.
P311
OSTEOPOROSIS AND UNDIAGNOSED VERTEBRAL
FRACTURES IN PERI- AND POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
WITH SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
S. Shkireeva1, O. Lesnyak2
1Scientific and Research Institution of Rheumatology V.A. Nasonova,
Moscow, 2North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov,
Saint-Petersburg, Russia
Objective: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune
disease with unknown etiology and polymorphic clinical picture
occurring mainly in women. Treat to target strategy has been proposed
in order to control disease activity, improve health-related quality of life,
and reduce morbidity and mortality. While autoimmune inflammation
being continuously reduced, comorbidities and medicine toxicity become
the focus of attention. By the 5th year the most common musculoskeletal
complications in patients with SLE are osteoporosis (OP) and
osteoporotic fractures. Our study aimed to investigate the prevalence of
osteoporosis and vertebral fractures in pre- and postmenopausal women
with SLE.
Methods: Cross-sectional study was performed among 197 consecutive
pre- and postmenopausal women with SLE. The only exclusion criteria
was chronic renal failure. The median [25%;75%] of age was 48 [44;56]
years and the median [25%;75%] of SLE duration was 7 [4;12] years.
43.7% of all women included in our study were postmenopausal. BMD
measurements of the hip and spine were performed using DXA. Vertebral
fracture assessment (VFA) was done for vertebral fractures detection
using a method described by Genant. Fracture risk was assessed using
the Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX®).
Results: All 197 patients had different fracture risks. The most prevalent
fracture rick was long therapy with glucocorticoids. By the moment of the
study 93.4% (n=184) of all women with SLE were taking glucocorticoids
and 53 (26.9%) women had osteoporotic fractures. The BMD (T-score) at
the femoral neck were lower than at total hip (p=0.000001) or spine
(p=0.000001). The median [25%; 75%] of 10-y probability of fracture
(FRAX) for major osteoporotic fractures before and after DXA were 11%
[8.4%; 20%] and 12% [8.4%; 20%], respectively. According to FRAX-
based intervention threshold 96 (48.7%) women with SLE
antiosteoporotic treatment had been considered. OP could be diagnosed
at 108 (54.8%) patients according to National Osteoporosis Foundation
guidelines. VFA have shown 87 vertebral fractures in 55 (27.9%) women
with SLE. In 31 (56.4%) cases vertebral fracture was asymptomatic and
had been diagnosed only at the study. After VFA the incidence of
vertebral fractures has risen to 15.7% (from 12.2% to 27.9%). 10
(18.2%) patients with vertebral fractures had normal BMD (T-score) at
spine and femur neck (BMD>-0.9 SD). Multivariate regression analysis
had shown that vertebral fractures were associated with longer
glucocorticoids intake (p=0.000001), the number of previous fractures
(р=0.000001), lower BMD of the hip (р<0.05). Following VFA the
number of patients with OP increased up to 61.4%.
Conclusion: Vertebral fractures are the most prevalent OP complication
in SLE. Undiagnosed vertebral fractures in pre- and postmenopausal
women with SLE are a challenging issue, underestimated by
rheumatologists. Those fractures may be subclinical or asymptomatic
thus providing diagnostic intricacies. The current method using DXA to
predict the presence of vertebral fracture has limited value and there is a
need for assessment of bone quality. VFA in pre- and postmenopausal
women with SLE could be recommended as screening method for
identification vertebral fractures.
P312
TEN CASES OF OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA: CLINICAL
FEATURES, OUTCOMES AND TREATMENT RESPONSE
S. Dashdamirova1, D. Gogas Yavuz1
1Marmara University School of Medicine, Dept. of Endocrinology &
Metabolism, Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a collagen related disorder
with an autosomal inheritance that characterized by low bone density
leading to recurrent fractures and deformities. We herein describe the
clinical features and outcomes in 10 cases of OI via to examine bone
turnover markers, bone mineral density measurements, and treatment
responses in long term.
Methods: Ten cases were diagnosed OI that followed up in a tertiary
endocrinology clinic were evaluated retrospectively. The data containing
the following information as history of fracture and antiresorptive
treatment, presence of deformities and blue sclera, BMD measurements,
serum osteocalcin, c-telopeptide, intact PTH, calcium levels, height, body
weight, and BMI during follow up recorded from patients files. Results of
genetic analyses also recorded. Patients phenotypes were classified based
on clinical and radiological criteria (Sillence classification).
Results: Median age of the cases was 34.5 (min: 23, max: 55) and the
male:female ratio in the cases was 7:3. Eight patients had a family history
of OI. According to Sillence classification; five patients were classified as
type 1, three of them were type 4 and two of them were type 3. All
patients experienced fractures, four of them had a history of ten or more
fractures. Common fracture areas were radius, femur, and tibia. Life
limiting deformities were observed in two patients. Hearing impairment
was detected in four patients, and blue sclera finding was seen in six
patients. Three patients did not receive any treatment for OI, these three
patients were classified as type 1, two of these patients had radius
fractures and one of them had phalanx fractures. Seven patients received
treatment with oral and intravenous bisphosphonates, denosumab, and
teriparatide, Three patients developed fractures after treatment, two of
them were type 3, and one of them type 4 OI. After teriparatide treatment
vertebra BMD increased, but femur neck BMD decreased and new
fracture did not develop. After 3 doses of denosumab new fracture
developed.
Conclusion: Clinical presentation and treatment responses were
heterogeneous. Patients had a history of osteoblastic and osteoclastic
treatments given consecutively.
P313
AN ESTIMATE OF THE INICIDENCE OF FRAGILITY
FRACTURES IN THE REPUBLIC OF IRELAND
D. O'Sullivan1, J. Carey2, C. Armstrong2, F. Heaney2, J. McCabe1
1Dept. of Trauma & Orthopaedics, Galway University Hospitals, 2Dept.
of Rheumatology, Galway University Hospitals, Galway, Ireland
Objective: There is a paucity of fragility fracture research on the Irish
population, especially identifying vertebral fractures. Previous reports
estimated that the annual incidence of fragility fractures in Ireland was
18,000. Our aim was to undertake the first national study estimating the
fracture incidence using national data on hospitalised and non-hospitalised
patients and estimating the incidence of subclinical fractures.
S198
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: International clinical trials and observational studies were
analysed that calculated fragility fracture incidence and the variability in
fracture site. Previously published Irish literature on hospitalised fragility
fractures using the Hospital in-patient enquiry system (HIPE) was
analysed and compared to international figures. Cross sectional audits
were carried out on orthopaedic outpatient clinics to determine frequency
of fragility fracture presentation and the proportion of patients
hospitalised. The incidence of subclinical fractures in Ireland was
estimated by applying results from international epidemiological studies.
Results: Applying EU6 estimates to the Irish population, the fragility
fracture incidence ranges from 24,000-51,000. Hip fracture incidence
ranges from 6.2-28% and vertebral fractures ranged from 15-30% in
observational studies. We estimate that the annual fracture incidence is
30,000-35,000 or 20 per 1000 over fifty in the Republic of Ireland. There
are 15,000-20,000 patients hospitalised, 4000-8000 seen in out-patient
clinics and a further 7000-21,000 subclinical fractures not formally
diagnosed.
Conclusion: The estimated incidence of fragility fractures in Ireland is
much higher than previously reported. Fragility fractures in Ireland are
underreported and undertreated. Further studies are required to identify
and treat all patients presenting with fragility fractures to decrease the
incidence of secondary fractures.
P314
MEASURED RESECTION VS. COMPUTER- ASSISTED GAP
BALANCING TECHNIQUE FOR COMPONENT ALIGNMENT
AND FEMORO-TIBIAL ROTATIONAL MISMATCH IN
POSTERIOR- STABILIZED TOTAL KNEE ARTHROPLASTY:
A PROSPECTIVE STUDY
A. Patamarat1, N. Kitcharanant2
1Phra Nakorn Si Ayutthaya Hospital, Ayutthaya, 2Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand
Objective: To evaluate a difference in the femoral and tibial component
rotational angle, femoro-tibial rotational mismatch, and the frequency of
outlier relative with the surgical transepicondylar axis (sTEA) of the
femur between measured resection technique and the computer-assisted
gap balancing technique when combined with self-aligned technique for
tibial component placement in posterior- stabilized total knee
arthroplasty.
Methods: 100 patients with endstage osteoarthritis of the knee underwent
primary total knee arthroplasty using the measured resection technique
(n=50) or the computer-assisted gap balancing technique (n=50). The
femoral and tibial component rotational angle, femoro-tibial rotational
mismatch, and the frequency of outlier relative with the sTEA of the
femur were evaluated 30 d after surgery using computed tomography.
Results: There were significant difference between the measured
resection technique group and the computer- assisted gap balancing
technique group in terms of the femoral component rotational angle
(0.28±1.16° vs. 1.52±1.31°, p<0.001), but the tibial component rotational
angle between both groups were without significant difference (1.28
±3.17° vs. 1.86± 2.81°, p=0.22). The mean femoro-tibial rotational
mismatch in the measured resection technique group and the computer-
assisted gap balancing technique group were 1.00± 3.28° and 0.34±
2.71°, respectively, without significant difference (p=0.306). No patients
had femoro-tibial mismatch over 10°. The outliers were least frequent in
the measured resection group than the computer-assisted gap balancing
technique group.
Conclusion: Both techniques contributed to significant difference in
femoral component rotation with a tendency to become more externally
rotated in the computer-assisted gap balancing group after posterior-
stabilized total knee arthroplasty. When combined with selfaligned
technique for tibial component placement, there were no significant
difference in tibial component rotation or femoro-tibial rotational
mismatch between both groups. All cases had <10° femoro-tibial
rotational mismatch.
P315
DYNAMICS OF SERUM β-CROSS LAPS LEVELS IN EARLY
MONITORING OF OSTEOPOROSIS TREATMENT WITH
DENOSUMAB
T. Simeonova1, K. Stefanova2, I. Himcheva1, P. Yordanova-Laleva3, A.
Dimitrova1, B. Ruseva1
1Dept. of Physiology & Pathophysiology, Medical University-Pleven,
2Diagnostic Consulting Center II - Pleven, 3Faculty of Pharmacy,
Medical University-Pleven, Pleven, Bulgaria
Objective: Recent antiresorptive long-term treatment for osteoporosis
increases BMD and reduces fracture risk. Due to the long duration, poor
adherence to medications is a big challenge. Bone mineral density
measurements are recommended in guidelines for monitoring of the
treatment, but changes in bone density may take up to 2-3 y to detect
and does not predict the reduction of fractures. Recent data suggest that
biochemical markers of bone turnover may be useful for monitoring since
they change rapidly in response to treatment. The variability of their
measurement reduces their value in clinical practice and more data are
needed. Our study aimed to assess whether the dynamics of marker for
bone resorption β-CrossLaps have a real practical benefit in the early
monitoring of the treatment of patients with postmenopausal
osteoporosis.
Methods: 21 Bulgarian women in menopause with newly diagnosed by
DXA osteoporosis were studied. All participants had not been under
treatment for osteoporosis. Serum β-CrossLaps levels were measured
before and 6 months after treatment with denosumab injection
subcutaneously 60 mg once every 6 months.
Results: Serum concentrations before and 6 months after starting
treatment are respectively 0.589±0.266 ng/ml /0.06 - 1.2/ and 0.166
±0.139 ng/ml /0.05 - 0.59/. The β-CrossLaps serum levels of a
pretreatment study are within the reference range for the commercial
kit. After 6 months of treatment, there was a significant decrease in serum
concentrations of about 72% from baseline. In Bulgaria, successful
treatment is considered to a decrease in β-CrossLaps values >56%.
Conclusion: In our study although pretreatment levels were within the
reference range, a significant decrease in concentrations was observed in
all patients. Our results show that the dynamics of β-CrossLaps may be
useful in the early monitoring of the therapeutic effect of treatment with
denosumab.
Acknowledgment: This research was funded by Medical University –
Pleven, Project №10/2018.
P316
EVALUATION OF DISEASE BURDEN, UNMET TREATMENT
AND MANAGEMENT NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH HIP AND
KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS: CONSENSUS STATEMENTS
FROM A DELPHI-METHOD PANEL IN TURKEY
H. F. Çay1, T. Tuncer2, A. Akıncı3, L. Altan4, S. Ataman5, S. Aydoğdu6,
D. Dıraçoğlu7, H. Genç8, S. Hepgüler9, A. Ketenci10, K. Öneş11, M.
Uyar12, A. Ölmez13, S. Gumru13
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Sağlık Bilimleri University, Antalya Education
and Research Hospital, Antalya, 2Dept. of Physical Medicine &
Rehabilitation, Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Antalya, 3Dept.
of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Hacettepe University Medical
School, Ankara, 4Dept. of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Uludağ
University Medical School, Bursa, 5Dept. of Rheumatology, Ankara
University Medical School, Ankara, 6Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery,
School of Medicine, Ege University, İzmir, 7Dept. of Physical Medicine
& Rehabilitation, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University,
İstanbul, 8Dept. of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, University of
Health Sciences, Ankara Training & Research Hospital, Ankara, 9Dept.
S199
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, School of Medicine, Ege
University, İzmir, 10Dept. of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation,
Division of Pain Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul
University, İstanbul, 11Dept. of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation,
İstanbul Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation Training & Research
Hospital, University of Health Sciences, İstanbul, 12Dept. of
Anesthesiology & Reanimation, Pain Clinic, Ege University,
İzmir,13Pfizer, İstanbul, Turkey
Objective: To get information-driven insights from expert physicians
regarding multiple aspects of the patient journey in knee and hip OA
and establish a consensus in order to set a stage for future studies and
decision tree models in Turkey.
Methods: 157 questions were asked in total during this three-round
modified Delphi-method panel to 10 physical medicine and rehabilitation
specialists (2 have rheumatology and 3 have algology subspeciality), one
orthopaedic surgeon and one algology specialist from anaesthesia
specialty background. A consensus was achieved when 80% of the panel
members agreed with an item. Contradictions between different
disciplines were accepted as a nonconsensus factor.
Results: Panelists agreed that American College of Rheumatology
classification criteria is mostly sufficient to provide an OA diagnosis in
clinical practice (100%). WOMAC pain subscale score of at least 5 in the
index hip or knee with Kellgren-Lawrence x-ray Grade of at least 2 was
accepted as a moderate to severe OA definition (81%). A 30% of
improvement from baseline in WOMAC pain or function subscales or
in PGA score were accepted as moderate treatment response where 50%
improvement from baseline in those scores as substantial responses with
full consensus (100%). Panelists reached a consensus that arthroplasty
procedures need to be delayed as long as possible, but this delay should
not jeopardize a beneficial and successful operation (90%). They
underlined that OA is an impairing and disabling disease (100%) which
results in a dramatic impact on quality of life (100%) and leading to early
retirement from active working life (81%). Panelists agreed that there is a
significant unmet treatment need for patients with moderate-to-severe OA
who are unable to take, tolerate or adequately respond to currently
available therapies.
Conclusion: These findings show that there is a significant disease
burden, unmet treatment needs for patients with moderate-to-severe OA
in Turkey from experts’ perspective. Therefore, an updated systematic
approach and decision tree models are needed to be implemented.
Disclosures: This research was sponsored by Pfizer. The panel members
received honoraria from Pfizer for their consultancy on answering the
questionnaires. Medical writing and editorial support were provided by
Remedium Consulting Group and was funded by Pfizer. H. Fatih Çay has
received speaker honorarium from Pfizer. Tiraje Tuncer has acted in
advisory board of Pfizer. Aysen Akıncı has acted in advisory board of
Novartis, Pfizer and has recieved speaker honorarium from Abbvie,
Novartis, Lilly and Pfizer. Lale Altan has acted in advisory board of
Novartis, Pfizer, Abbvie, Roche, Eli Lilly and MSD, and has received
speaker honorarium from Novartis, Pfizer, Abbvie, Gensenta, İbrahim
Ethem, Sanovel, Roche, Exeltis, Santa Farma, Eli Lilly and MSD.
Sebnem Ataman has acted in the advisory board or received a speaker
honorarium at pharmaceutical companies, including Novartis, Pfizer,
Abbvie, Amgen, and Lilly. Semih Aydoğdu has acted in advisory board
of Pfizer. Demirhan Dıraçoğlu has received speaker honorarium from
Expanscience, Pfizer and Sandoz. Hakan Genç has acted in advisory
board of İE Menarini and Pfizer and has received speaker honorarium
from Pfizer and İE Menarini. Simin Hepgüler has acted in advisory board
of Pfizer and has recieved speaker honorarium from Novartis. Ayşegül
Ketenci has acted in advisory board of Abdi İbrahim, İbrahim Ethem
Menarini, MEDA, Pfizer, and has received speaker honorarium from of
Abdi İbrahim, Adilna Sanovel, İbrahim Ethem Menarini, MEDA, Santa
Farma, Pfizer, Viatris. Kadriye Öneş has acted in advisory board of
Novartis, Pfizer, and Bristol Myers Squibb and has received speaker
honorarium from Pfizer. Meltem Uyar has acted in advisory board of
Pfizer.
P317
INDICATIONS FOR SURGICAL TREATMENT OF
THORACOLUMBAR KYPHOSIS IN PATIENTS WITH
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS
V. S. Pereverzev1, A. I. Kazmin1, A. A. Panteleev1, M. L. Sazhnev1
1N.N. Priorov Central Scientific Research Institute of Traumatology &
Orthopedics, Moscow, Russia
Objective: This retrospective multicenter study compares the long-term
results of circumferential and posterior-only surgical treatment of
thoracolumbar kyphosis in patients with MPS. Considering multiple
concomitant organ disorders in MPS patients, anterior stabilization
increases risks of complications. A posterior-only approach can provide
stable fixation with lowered complication risks in MPS patients.
Circumferential fusion of kyphosis in patients with MPS is currently
accepted as the most effective surgical approach. However, long-term
results remain debatable. This study assesses the effectiveness of
posterior-only compared to circumferential fusion.
Methods: A retrospective multicenter study. Eleven patients (7 male, 4
female) with MPS and thoracolumbar kyphosis underwent surgical
treatment. Hurler syndrome (type I) was diagnosed in 5 patients,
Morquio syndrome (type IV) in 2, and Maroto-Lamy (type VI) in 4
patients. Indications for surgical treatment included more than 40°
kyphosis, sagittal spinal imbalance, progressive neurological symptoms
and severe pain. In 3 cases, patients underwent circumferential
arthrodesis combining anterior and posterior approaches. In 8 cases,
instrumentation included hooks and/or pedicular screws, placed two
levels above and two levels below the deformity apex. The follow-up
period ranged from 2-5 y.
Results: In 8 cases solid spinal fusion was achieved. Complications after
surgical treatment were observed in 4 patients (36%). PJK developed in
one case 2 y after surgery, pseudarthrosis was observed in one case,
wound suppuration was observed in one case, and a broken metal rod
in one case.
Conclusion: Surgical treatment of MPS patients with thoracolumbar
kyphosis is accompanied by a high risk of complications when
circumferential stabilization is performed. Most authors and our data
show that the most optimal method of surgical treatment of
thoracolumbar deformation is dorsal correction and fixation in
combination with a wide laminectomy at the level of stenosis. The second
stage includes the anterior decompression and interbody fusion.
However, if the patient’s lung function is dramatically compromised,
and a high risk of respiratory complications exists, surgery may be limited
to only posterior correction and fixation in conjunction with a wide
laminectomy, which allows to achieve a comparable level of fixation with
a lower risk of complications.
P318
RISK FACTORS AND SURGICAL TREATMENT OF
CRANIOVERTEBRAL STENOSIS IN PATIENTS WITH
M A R O T E A U X - L A M Y
S Y N D R O M E
(MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI)
V. S. Pereverzev1, A. I. Kazmin1, A. A. Panteleev1, M. L. Sazhnev1
1N.N. Priorov Central Scientific Research Institute of Traumatology and
Orthopedics, Moscow, Russia
Objective: The most common lesion of the spine with
mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) is spinal
stenosis at the atlantoaxial junction, which leads to neurological
complications of varying degree, including tetraparesis or tetraplegia due
to spinal cord compression at this level. This retrospective multicenter
S200
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
study presents the long-term results of surgical treatment of patients with
the Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome. Early decompression of the spinal canal
with leads to atlantoaxial stabilization and regression of neurological
symptoms in patients with Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome. Atlantoaxial
instability with the outcome of myelopathy and spastic tetraparesis are
commonly described in patients with MPS VI type. The accumulation of
glycosaminoglycans behind the odontoid process leads to a gradual
development of the spinal canal stenosis and compression of the spinal
cord in the cervical spine. These lesions lead to neurological disorders
and loss of quality of life.
Methods: A retrospective, multicenter study. Nine patients with MPS type
VI. Of them 3 males and 6 females aged 14-35 y (mean age 20.8 y). All
patients presented with craniovertebral stenosis of some degree and
underwent posterior spinal canal decompression with cervical fusion.
Neurological symptoms were observed in 7 of all cases preoperatively.
Functional assessment and evaluation of neurological status was conducted
in all cases. CT and MRI evaluation was performed at the atlantoaxial level
before surgery and at follow-up.
Results: The average follow-up period was 2.9 y. Seven of the nine patients
demonstrated regression of neurological symptoms. In two patients the
neurological status was unchanged. Solid fusion was achieved in 6 cases.
Complications from surgery we observed in 3 patients. One patient died
one year after surgery due to unrelated causes, there was one case of
pseudarthrosis one case of implant instability and one case of early
postoperative wound suppuration.
Conclusion: The majority of patients with type VI MPS present with
some degree of spinal stenosis at the atlantoaxial level. Based on our
experience, these patients require close neurological and radiographic
monitoring as early as possible. In our view, surgical treatment of patients
with type VI MPS should be considered before the onset and progression
of neurological symptoms.
P319
THE IMPACT OF MUSCULOSKELETAL CONDITIONS AND
FRAILTY ON THE ABILITY TO SELF-CARE OR BE IN
RECEIPT OF CARE: A STUDY OF COMMUNITY-DWELLING
OLDER ADULTS FROM THE HERTFORDSHIRE COHORT
STUDY
G. Bevilacqua1, F. Laskou1, H. P. Patel1, K. Jameson1, N. Fuggle1, C.
Cooper1, E. M. Dennison1
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, UK
Objective: Musculoskeletal conditions and frailty lead to a significant
burden of disease in later life. However, living independently remains
the aim of older adults. The ability to self-care and reliance on external,
or access to care at home may hamper this. Musculoskeletal conditions
(MSC) as well as frailty lead to significant morbidity in later life and may
influence care needs. In this study, we consider whether MSC
(osteoporosis, sarcopenia, osteoarthritis) and frailty are associated with
ability to self-care, and influence access to formal/informal care among
community-dwelling older adults.
Methods: Participants were recruited from the Hertfordshire Cohort
Study, an established cohort study of community-dwelling adults in the
UK. Osteoporosis was assessed using DXA. Sarcopenia was assessed
using EWSGOP2 criteria. Osteoarthritis of the hand, hip or knee was
defined by clinical examination. Frailty was assessed using Fried criteria.
Ability to self-care and access to formal/informal care were self-reported.
Results: 443 men and women (median age 75.5 [IQR 73.5-77.9] y)
participated. Osteoporosis affected (n=74) 21.4% of participants,
(n=115) 26.8% had osteoarthritis, (n=30) 8.6% had sarcopenia, and
(n=33) 7.6% were identified as frail. Most participants (n=402 [90.7%])
reported no problems with self-care. Identical proportions of participants
received informal (n=53 [12%]) and formal (n=53 [12%]) care at home in
the previous year. Reporting difficulties with self-care was associated
with clinical osteoarthritis (OR 3.48, 95%CI 1.63-7.43, p=0.001) and
frailty (5.29, 2.12-13.2, p<0.001), but not with osteoporosis or
sarcopenia. Receiving informal care at home in the past year was
associated with osteoarthritis (2.56, 1.28-5.14, p=0.008), the coexistence
of two or more MSC (6.50, 1.66-25.39, p=0.007), and frailty (6.25, 2.59-
15.08, p<0.001), but not with osteoporosis or sarcopenia alone. None of
the conditions were associated with receiving formal care.
Conclusion: MSC are associated with informal receipt of care. Presence
of two or more MSC convey similar informal care requirements to those
living with frailty. Early assessment and management of MSC and frailty
in clinical practice may reduce need for care and preserve independence.
P320
PROSPECTIVE OBSERVATIONAL STUDY IN REAL LIFE
TREATMENT IN LATINAMERICAN PATIENTS WITH
DENOSUMB QUERY DATABASE (ROSELA DATABASE):
PRELIMINARY REPORT IN 2285 PATIENTS
F. Cons-Molina1, J. L. Balcazar2, E. Romero3, J. F. Molina4, J. A.
Montaño5, L. J. Elizondo-Alanis6, F. Irazoque7, A. J. Zarain8, J. A.
Veloz9, J. Morales-Torres10, F. Olan11, C. R. Salinas12, M. A. Perez-
Romero13, D. A. Bernal14, C. R. Rios15, C. Aguiar-Moreira16, B. Muzzi
Camargos17, L. Guimarães-Oliveira18, S. Duran19, N. Casas20, A.
Roman-Gonzalez21, L. Brance22, M. S. Larroude23, E. Teixeira24, A. J.
Chuquihuara25, J. F. Betancur26, D. O. Messina27, D. Wiluzanski28, M. E.
Algan29, M. Candela30, M. B. Zancheta30, E. A. Zamora31, R. G.
Sanchez32, R. M. Martinez33, M. A. Polanco34, H. Avila35, A. Escobar36
1Centro Investigacion en Artritis y Osteoporosis, Mexicali, Mexico,
2Hospital Regional ISSSTE Culiacan, Culiacan, Mexico, 3Osteology
Medical Office, Tacuarembo, Uruguay, 4Centro Reumalab, Medellin,
Colombia, 5Diagnóstico Integral Para la Mujer GineDX, Mexico City,
Mexico, 6Centro de Investigación Clínica de Cd. Obregon, Obregon city,
Mexico, 7Centro de Investigación y Tratamiento Reumatológico, Mexico
City, Mexico, 8Centro de Climaterio Menopausia y Osteoporosis, Puebla,
Mexico, 9Hospital Regional ISSSTE Leon, Leon, Mexico, 10Hospital
Aranda de la Parra, Leon, Mexico, 11Hospital Regional de Alta
Especialidad, Villahermosa, Mexico, 12Hospital Angeles de Puebla,
Puebla, Mexico, 13Centro Integral para la Atención de la Osteoporosis,
Guadalajara, Mexico, 14Unidad de Endocrinología y Densitometria,
Mexicali, Mexico, 15Centro de Reumatología y Rehabilitación,
Guayaquil, Ecuador, 16SEMPR- Hospital de Clinicas- UFPR, Curitiba,
Brazil, 17Clinica y Pesquisa de Osteoporosis, Bello Horizonte, Brazil,
18Clinica de Ortopedia e Fraturas, Goiânia, Brazil, 19Clínica de
Investigación en Reumatología y Obesidad, Guadalajara, Mexico,
20Rheumatology Medical office, Bogota, Colombia, 21Hospital
Universitario San Vicente Fundación, Medellin, Colombia, 22Centro de
Reumatologia, Rosario, Argentina, 23Rheumatology Medical office,
Buenos Aires, Argentina, 24Complejo Hospitalario San Pablo, Lima,
Peru, 25Hospital Nacional Dos de Mayo, Lima, Peru, 26Clinica Medellin,
Medellin, Colombia, 27Investigaciones Reumatologicas y Osteologicas,
Buenos Aires, Argentina, 28CENTROSEO, Montevideo, Uruguay,
29Hospital Provincial SAMCO Rufino., Rufino, Argentina, 30Instituto
Investigaciones Metabolicas IDIM, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 31Medical
Care & Research SA de CV, Merida, Mexico, 32Centro Medico Puerta de
Hierro Sur, Zapopan, Mexico, 33Endocrinology Medical office,
Guadalajara, Mexico, 34Endocrinology Medical Office, Guadalajara,
Mexico, 35Centro Integral en Reumatologia, S.A. de C.V., Guadalajara,
Mexico, 36Consultorio Ginecología y Obstetricia, Tijuana, Mexico
Objective: Preliminary report of a real-life experience in treatment of
postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOp) with denosumab (Dmab).
Methods: A multicenter prospective, descriptive cohort study, conducted
in 8 countries (Mexico, Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, Uruguay,
Chile, Brazil) with up to 8 y of clinical records of patients treated with
Dmab. A online DB was used to collect data in 41 centers.
Results: 2285 patients age at baseline(BL) 66 ±9.8 y,75.1% with >60 y.
The main reason for using Dmab: hip Op (36.8%) in DXA; lack of BMD
S201
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
gain (31.9%). Dmab was used as the first anti-Op drug in 971(42.5%)
patients and 57.5% had used prior anti-Op medication. The average BMD
increase from BL up to 8th year was in LS 16.1%, in FN 7,3% and TF
7.9%. The comparison between diabetics and nondiabetics shows a
decrease in BMD gain in TF from the 1st year and in LS from the 4th
year ahead. The 10 y FRAX level was 9.1±6.3 for major OP fracture (Fx)
at BL and for hip Fx 3.3±4.2. A total of 563 (24.6%) prevalent Fx were
detected at BL; 201 patients(36.7%) with >1 Fx. Only 107 patients
(4.6%) developed Fx during treatment with Dmab. Vertebral (VFx) and
nonvertebral Fx (NVFx) increase during 2nd and 3rd years of treatment,
related to a decrease in persistence. Adverse events (AE) were reported in
61 patients (2.6%) and SAE in 71(3.1%), including 2 eczema, 1 ONM
and 2 AFF cases. Adherence to Dmab treatment is not optimal, mainly in
years 2-4. Only 45% completed 2 y of treatment and only 11% used for at
least 4 y with a patient loss of follow-up (50.2%). Most patients received
no treatment after discontinuing DMAb, 10 cases of post-Dmab vertebral
Fx, 3 with >1 fracture was reported.
Conclusion: Dmab improves BMD and reduces rate of VFx and NVFx
in most patients with PMOp in a real-life environment in 8 LatAm
countries. Patient follow-up loss is very high in LatAm countries.
Dmab proved to be as safe as observed in clinical registry studies with
a very low rate of AE and SAE.
P321
ASSESSMENT OF TREATMENT PRACTICES OF
GLUCOCORTICOID-INDUCED OSTEOPOROSIS AND THEIR
ADEQUACY
M. Nunes1, J. F. Ferreira2, A. S. Pinto2, F. C. Santos2, C. Vaz2
1Faculdade de Ciências da Saúde da Universidade da Beira Interior,
Covilhã, 2Unidade de Saúde Local da Guarda, Guarda, Portugal
Objective: To assess the current treatment practices of glucocorticoid-
induced osteoporosis (GIOP) in patients followed in Rheumatology
outpatient clinic in a Portuguese secondary hospital.
Methods: A retrospective cohort study was conducted in patients
followed in Rheumatology outpatient clinic in a Portuguese secondary
hospital between 1 June 2019 and 31 December 2019. Patients with
inflammatory rheumatic disease, under glucocorticoid (GC) treatment
for ≥3 months, with a daily dosage of ≥2.5 mg were included in the study.
Sociodemographic, clinical and GIOP management data were obtained
from clinical records. Using the 2017 American College of
Rheumatology (ACR) guidelines for the prevention and treatment of
GIOP as reference, treatment adequacy was assessed and treatment
prescription predictors were identified. Patients were grouped by age
(<40 and ≥40) and analyzed separately. Descriptive and inferential
analysis were conducted using 5 and 7.5 mg of daily GC as cutoffs.
Mann-Whitney and chi-squared or exact Fisher tests were used, as well
as a multivariable classification tree analysis.
Results: Of 676 patients followed in this Rheumatology outpatient clinic
in that period, 103 were included in the study. Patients’ mean age was
60.9 (±13.3) and 68% were female. Seven patients were <40 years old,
one of which was considered undertreated according to ACR guidelines.
Of the 96 patients ≥40 years old, 20.8% were adequately treated and
40.6% were undertreated. No patients were considered overtreated.
Factors associated with GIOP treatment prescription were older age,
higher major bone fracture or hip bone fracture risk obtained through
Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX) and previous bone fragility
fracture. A FRAX score for hip fracture ≥3% and a vertebral BMD T-
score <-2.1 were identified as prescription determinants of
pharmacological treatment.
Conclusion: Following the 2017 ACR guidelines, a large proportion of
patients with inflammatory rheumatic disease chronically treated with GC
were undertreated for GIOP. There are, however, limitations in these
guidelines application to the Portuguese population which emphasize
the need to develop national clinical recommendations for the prevention
and treatment of GIOP.
P322
CLINICAL OUTCOME AND HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY
OF LIFE OF FRAGILITY HIP FRACTURE PATIENTS: A
FOLLOW UP STUDY IN TERTIARY CARE FACILITY IN SRI
LANKA
T. Abeygunasekara1, S. Lekamwasam2
1Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, University of Ruhuna, 2Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka
Objective: To assess the clinical outcome and health-related quality of
life (HRQOL) of hip fracture patients admitted to a tertiary care facility in
southern Sri Lanka for 12 months.
Methods: Hip fracture patients (n=180) admitted to Teaching Hospital,
Karapitiya and age and sex matched controls from their neighborhood
(n=348) were included in the case control study. The 180 fragility hip
fracture patients were followed up for one year to assess morbidity,
mortality and the HRQOL at regular intervals after the fracture. The
HRQOL was assessed using the validated Sinhala versions of the SF
36, BI and MMSE scale. Results were presented as numbers
(percentages), mean (SD) or median (IQR), appropriately. Chi-square test
and independent t-test were used to compare groups. ROC analyses were
done for selected variables considering the death/survival as the
dependent variable.
Results: Of 180 patients (149 women), 107 had surgery while the rest
were managed conservatively. Mean (SD) age of study subjects was 76.5
(9.2 y). Patients who underwent surgery had less complications compared
to those managed conservatively (15% vs. 51% with one complication or
more) (p<0.001). Thirty three patients who died within the first 12 months
were older, had higher comorbidity and physical impairment before
fracture and at discharge from the hospital, when compared with those
survived. An initial sharp decline and a partial recovery was seen in the
total SF 36 score and physical and psychological domains among patients
with hip fractures. Furthermore, patients who had surgical treatment had
significantly higher physical independence at 12 months compared to
those managed nonsurgically (mean BI 81 vs. 10.5). In the ROC analysis,
AUC for age, Charlson index, age-adjusted Charlson index, BI before
fracture and BI at discharge were 0.77 (0.04), 0.79 (0.04), 0.70 (0.05),
0.67 (0.05) and 0.76 (0.04) (p<0.01 for all). The two groups were similar
in mental status but control group had better HRQOL and ADL than hip
fracture patients (p<0.01).
Conclusion: Hip fracture leads to higher mortality, physical dependence
and poor QOL especially among those managed nonsurgically. This
study found gaps in the current management of hip fracture patients.
P323
D O E S O R T H O P E D I S T S L E A R N T O M A N A G E
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES DURING ORTHOPAEDIC
RESIDENCY PROGRAM?
G. Ocampos1, M. Arouca1, M. Peres1, M. Rezende1, O. Camargo1
1Institute of Orthopedics & Traumatology, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculty
of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Objective: To evaluate whether residents (r1, r2 or r3, according to the
year of formation) of orthopedics in a tertiary service investigate, treat
and/or refer the patient with an osteoporotic fracture to treat osteoporosis
(OP) and whether this management improved during residency program.
Methods: All residents answered diagnostic and therapeutic questions
related to a clinical case of osteoporotic fracture (hip transtrochanteric
fracture) in 4 scenarios: initial care in the emergency room, at the time
of hospital discharge, during outpatient follow up at 3 and 6 months.
Answers were compared between years of residence.
S202
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: Twenty r1, 21 r2 and 19 r3 answered the questions. One resident
adequately treated osteoporosis in r1, two in r2 and four in r3. 75% of r1,
90.5% of r2 and 68% of r3 referred patients for OP treatment. There is an
improvement in the prescription of laboratory tests for osteoporosis
investigation over the years (p=0.028), with 52.6% of 3rd year residents
prescribing adequate laboratory tests. In the same period 100% of r3
correctly prescribed prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis (p=0.001).
Conclusion: Despite being below the ideal, residents treat and/or refer
patients with osteoporotic fractures for secondary prevention. The
orthopaedic residency program improves resident performance in
osteoporotic fracture management, in spite of comparison with deep
venous thrombosis management shows that there is a lot of room for
improvement.
P324
A RETROSPECTIVE OBSERVATIONAL STUDY OF
OSTEOPOROSIS MANAGEMENT AFTER A FRAGILITY
FRACTURE IN PRIMARY CARE
A. Bell1, D. L. Kendler2, A. A. Khan3, M. Shapiro1, A. Morisset4, J.-P.
Leung5, M. Reiner6, S. M. Colgan6, M. Packalen7, L. Slatkovska7
1Dept. of Family & Community Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada, 2Dept. of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, 3Dept. of
Medicine, Divisions of Endocrinology & Metabolism and Geriatrics,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada, 4CIUSSS de l’Estrie –
CHUS, Centre Haute- Yamaska, Granby, Canada, 5Dept. of Family
Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada, 6Amgen Inc.,
California, USA, 7Amgen Canada Inc., Mississauga, Canada
Objective: A fragility fracture is a clinical manifestation of osteoporosis
and a major risk factor for subsequent fracture in adults aged 50+, yet
adherence to secondary prevention strategies is lacking internationally.
This retrospective observational study aimed to characterize post-fracture
management, in the Canadian primary care setting.
Methods: Patients with an index fragility fracture occurring between
January 1, 2014 and December 1, 2016 were identified, from medical
records reviewed at 76 primary care centers in Canada, with follow-up
until January 2018. Fragility fracture was defined as a fracture occurring
without major trauma at any skeletal site other than the skull, face,
cervical spine, hand, metatarsus, phalanges or patella. Patients with a
history of fragility fracture in the five years prior to their index fracture
were excluded.
Results: Of all 778 patients identified (80.5% female, median age [IQR]
73 [64-80]), 215 were on osteoporosis treatment and 269 had
osteoporosis diagnosis recorded prior to their index fracture. The median
follow-up after index fracture was 363 (IQR 91-808) days. Of patients not
on osteoporosis treatment at their index fracture, 60.2% (n=339/563)
remained untreated after their index fracture and 62.2% (n=23/37)
continued untreated after their subsequent facture. After their index
fracture, fracture risk assessment (FRAX or CAROC) was not performed
in 83.2% (n=647/778) of patients, and 59.9% (n=466/778) of patients did
not receive BMD testing. Of patients who did not have osteoporosis
diagnosis recorded prior to their index date, 58.9% (n=300/509) remained
undiagnosed over the interval from index fracture to the end of follow-up.
At least one subsequent fracture occurred in 11.1% (n=86/778) of patients
after their index fracture until the end of study follow-up.
Conclusion: In the primary care setting, fragility fracture infrequently
resulted in osteoporosis treatment or fracture risk assessment. Even after
experiencing multiple fragility fractures over a relatively short follow-up,
the majority of patients remained untreated. These results suggest a
fragility fracture is not recognized as a major risk factor for subsequent
fracture and its occurrence does not prompt primary care physicians to
intervene. These data should direct initiatives to overcome obstacles to
primary care physicians’ effective management of patients after initial
fragility fractures.
P325
P H O T O B I O M O D U L A T I O N : A N E W T O O L F O R
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN IN TOTAL KNEE ARTHROPLASTY?
A CASE SERIES
G. Ocampos1, M. Arouca1, M. Rezende1, B. Varone1, D. Martuscelli1, G.
Freire1, N. Pinto2, M. Souza2, O. Camargo1
1Institute of Orthopedics & Traumatology, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculty
of Medicine, University of São Paulo, 2Bright Photomedicine, São Paulo,
Brazil
Objective: To evaluate the effect of photobiomodulation (PBM, low
level laser therapy) in postoperative pain control after total knee
arthroplasty.
Methods: Nine patients with knee osteoarthritis were submitted to
primary total knee arthroplasty under spinal anesthesia and sedation.
Among postoperative analgesia, all patients received obturator and
femoral blockage guided by ultrasound, dipyrone 30 mg/kg, intravenous,
every 6 h, ketorolac 30g, intramuscular, every 12 h, for 3 d. If still with
pain patients could receive morphine, 2 mg, intravenous, by a patient
control analgesia device. PBM was applied with a light aid equipment
from Bright Photomedicine, with LEDs of 850 nm. Patients received
sessions of PBM in the operating room after wound closure and after
24 h in the topography of femoral nerve, for 4 min, and parallel to the
surgical incision for 2 min. The total consumption of morphine from the
immediate postoperative period until hospital discharge was recorded.
Pain, at rest and at movement, was assessed using the visual analog scale
from the immediate postoperative period until the second postoperative
day.
Results: Patients received 16.7±15 mg of morphine until the third
postoperative day. Pain at rest and at movement average 4.8±3.2 and
5.6±3.5 in the immediate postoperative period. In the first postoperative
day, pain at rest and at movement were 3±3,1 and 4.2±2.9 at 6:00; 2.3
±2.3 and 3.7±2.1 at 12:00; 1.6±1.2 and 2.4±1.6 at 18:00. On day two
postoperative pain at rest and at movement average 1.2±1.6 and 3.5
±1.8 at 6:00; 1.2±1.4 and 3.5±2.9 at 12:00; 0.4±1 and 2.2±1.8 at 18:00.
Conclusion: PBM may be a tool to assist in the control of postoperative
pain in patients submitted to total knee arthroplasty.
P326
VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY IN RUSSIAN FEDERATION
L. A. Suplotova1, V. A. Avdeeva1, E. A. Pigarova2, L. Y. Rozhinskaya2,
E. A. Troshina2
1Tyumen State Medical University, Tyumen, 2Endocrinology Research
Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Most of the territory of Russian Federation, due to its
geographical location, climatic and weather conditions, has all the
prerequisites for the development of vitamin D deficiency and
insufficiency in the population. This study aimed to estimate the
incidence of vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency in the representative
population sample from Russian Federation.
Methods: Russian multicenter noninterventional, cross-sectional study
was conducted in two time periods: March-May(spring) and October-
November (autumn) of 2020. Study population included 996
conditionally healthy volunteers from 10 regions of the Russian
Federation (latitudes from 45° to 70°). The level of 25(OH) D was
considered as adequate at a value of ≥30 ng/ml, insufficiency - ≥20 and
<30 ng/ml, deficiency - <20 ng/ml. All patients were evaluated for
25(OH) serum by chemiluminescence immunoassay. The study was
carried out with the financial support of the company JSC
"AKRIKHIN", protocol # AQ-01/20, version 2.0 from February 25, 2020.
Results: Study results showed that deficient levels of 25(OH)D were
registered in 39.36% of cases, insufficient in 32.83%. In total, 72.19%
of the examined individuals had deficiency or insufficiency of vitamin D,
and optimal level of the vitamin were showed in only 27.81%. The
S203
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
prevalence of vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency depended on the time
period with statistically significant difference (p<0.00001) - 84.27% in
the spring vs. 62.43% in the autumn. The study also examined basic
demographic characteristics such as gender and age. The data obtained
indicate that the highest incidence of vitamin D deficiency and
insufficiency in males vs. women (p=0.013, 79.05% and 70.36%,
respectively), as well as the most pronounced vitamin D deficiency was
observed in young people in the age subgroup of 18-25 years old
(p<0.001) and constitute 79.15%.
Conclusion: The results of the study indicate a widespread significant
prevalence of vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency in the Russian
Federation, regardless of the region of residence and season. The main
risk group for suboptimal levels of 25(OH)D in serum was young men.
P327
PREVALENCE OF CLINICAL RISK FACTORS OF
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES AMONG URBAN AND
RURAL POPULATIONS OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
I. Skripnikova1, M. Miagkova1, S. Shalnova1, V. Vygodin1
1Federal State Institution "National Medical Research Center for Therapy
and Preventive Medicine" of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian
Federation, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To study the prevalence of clinical risk factors (RFs) of
fractures, which are components of the FRAX calculator, among urban
and rural populations of the Russian Federation.
Methods: Representative samples of urban from 12 regions and rural
populationsfrom 4regionsofthe RussianFederation were analyzed. Intotal
13,116 Russian residents aged 40-69 y participated in the study (8489
women, 4627 men). Groups of urban (n=11962) and rural (n=1154)
populations were comparable by age. Participants were interviewed using
a single standard modular questionnaire containing questions about
clinical RFs of fractures included in FRAX.
Results: Among the studied RFs of fractures, the most common were the
following: previous fractures (16.3%), causes of secondary osteoporosis
(20.8%) and current smoking (17.9%). In men were more often registered
previous fractures (20.3%), smoking (34.3%) and alcohol abuse (5.5%),
while in women – causes of secondary osteoporosis (28.1%), rheumatoid
arthritis (3.7%) and taking glucocorticoids (3.6%), regardless of the place
of residence. With age, the frequency of all RFs in women and men
increased, with the exception of smoking and alcohol abuse. In rural
men, the frequency of previous fractures and alcohol abuse was higher
than in urban ones (24.3% vs. 19.9%, p<0.05 and 7.6% vs. 5.3%,
p<0.05). At the same time, women living in the city, compared to rural
women, had more frequent RFs of fractures such as smoking (10.7% vs.
8.3%, p<0.05) and taking glucocorticoids (3.9% vs. 1.4%, p<0.001).
Conclusion: The prevalence of RFs of fractures varied in different
regions of the Russian Federation depending on age and gender and the
type of settlement. Previous fractures and alcohol abuse predominated in
rural men compared to men living in the city. Smoking and taking
glucocorticoids were more common in urban women compared to rural
ones.
P328
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN THE OSTEOPOROTIC
FRACTURES RISK AND THE TOTAL CARDIOVASCULAR
RISK IN URBAN AND RURAL POPULATIONS
M. Miagkova1, I. Skripnikova1, S. Shalnova1, V. Vygodin1
1Federal State Institution "National Medical Research Center for Therapy
and Preventive Medicine" of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian
Federation, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To analyze the relationship between the absolute risk (AR) of
osteoporotic fractures (OPF) and the total cardiovascular risk (CVR)
among the urban and rural population of the Russian Federation.
Methods: A representative samples of urban (n=11,962) and rural
(n=1154) population of men and women aged 40-69 y from 12 regions
of the Russian Federation were analyzed. Over the next 10 y AR of OPF
was calculated on the basis of the Russian FRAX model without taking
into account BMD. Total CVR was evaluated in individuals <65 y on the
basis of the Euro Heart SCORE scale for high-risk countries.
Results: Among all study participants, the frequency of high AR of major
fractures was 7.0%. High and very high CVR was detected in 13.0% of
40-64 years old population with no history of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular diseases and diabetes mellitus. Among the urban residents,
moderate and strong positive correlations between AR of OPF and CVR
were found: for AR of major fractures and CVR in women r=0.48,
p<0.0001 and in men r=0.17, p<0.0001; for AR of hip fractures and
CVR in women r=0.54, p<0.0001 and in men r=0.56, p<0.0001.
Similar correlations were observed in rural residents: for AR of major
fractures and CVR in women r=0.49, p<0.0001 and in men r=0.13,
p<0.01; for AR of hip fractures and CVR in women r=0.53, p<0.0001
and in men r=0.47, p<0.0001. In the presence of high and very high CVR
(≥5%), these relationships were confirmed by the logistic regression
analysis: AR of hip fractures ≥1% was increased by 1.9 times
(95%CI=1.5-2.4, p<0.001), AR of major fractures ≥10% – 1.5 times
(95%CI=1.3-2.0, p<0.05), high AR of major fractures, according to the
threshold of therapeutic intervention was increased by 1.3 times
(95%CI=1.2-1.6, p<0.05).
Conclusion: In both urban and rural residents, a positive association was
found between AR of OPF and CVR, regardless of gender. It is likely that
a comprehensive approach aimed at early detection of comorbid
pathology of osteoporosis and atherosclerosis may have equal value for
the urban and rural populations.
P329
PREGNANCY-RELATED OSTEOPOROSIS: SINGLE-CENTER
EXPERIENCE (SERIES OF CASES)
A. Povaliaeva1, E. Pigarova1, L. Dzeranova1, L. Rozhinskaya1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Pregnancy-related osteoporosis is an extremely rare condition
which leads to the development of severe complications and disability in
young women. Deciding on a management strategy is particularly
difficult due to the lack of evidence and clinical guidelines.
Methods: We present 17 cases of pregnancy-related osteoporosis in
women aged between 25-43 y, who were referred to a tertiary
osteoporosis care center during the period from 2009-2021. Nine patients
were diagnosed between 1 month and 3 y postpartum, and eight patients
were diagnosed in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy.
Results: Risk factors for osteoporosis in the anamnesis were identified
only in 5 patients (29%) and included heparin treatment, chemotherapy,
underweight, thyrotoxicosis and gestational diabetes mellitus. All patients
had normocalcemia and normophosphatemia; three patients had mild
secondary hyperparathyroidism due to vitamin D deficiency. One patient
presented with hypercalciuria. 4/10 (40%) had low serum osteocalcin and
2/6 (33%) had elevated β-CrossLaps. Thirteen patients had multiple
vertebral compression fractures at X-ray or MRI with a prominent
decrease in BMD (median spinal Z-score -3.0 SD, range from -2.1 to -
4.4 SD) and one patient had bilateral hip fracture. Treatment approaches
included calcium (1000–2000 mg/d) and vitamin D (alfacalcidol 0.5–3
μg/d or cholecalciferol 10000–20000 IU/week) in all patients; 12 patients
(71%) received specific treatment: 5 – bisphosphonates, 4 – teriparatide, 3
– denosumab, 3 – calcitonin spray, 2 – strontium ranelate. Three women
underwent vertebroplasty and one woman had bilateral hip replacement.
Follow-up DXA data were available in 10 patients with a median of 24
months, 8/10 (80%) had an improvement in lumbar spine BMD. Both
patients with continuing loss of BMD and 5/8 (63%) of patients with
improved BMD received no specific treatment.
S204
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: Our data confirm the severity of pregnancy-related
osteoporosis and the difficulty of its diagnosing and managing. There is
still insufficient data to determine the optimal management of these
patients.
P330
CHOLECALCIFEROL BOLUS TREATMENT IN MILD
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM: EFFECTS ON
VITAMIN D METABOLISM AND CALCIUM-PHOSPHORUS
PARAMETERS
I. Maganeva1, A. Povaliaeva1, V. Bogdanov1, A. Zhukov1, E. Pigarova1,
L. Dzeranova1, L. Rozhinskaya1, N. Mokrysheva1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate vitamin D metabolism in patients with primary
hyperparathyroidism in the setting of cholecalciferol bolus dose
treatment.
Methods: The study included 18 patients with mild primary
hyperparathyroidism (defined as serum calcium <3.0 mmol/L), 3 males
and 15 females, median age 55.6 [44.8; 59] years. All participants did not
take any vitamin D containing supplements or drugs that interfere with
vitamin D metabolism within 3 months prior to the participation in the
study and were tested for serum vitamin D metabolites (25(OH)D3,
25(OH)D2, 1,25(OH)2D3, 3-epi-25(OH)D3, 24,25(OH)2D3 and D3) by
UPLC-MS/MS, PTH by electrochemiluminescence immunoassay,
routine serum biochemical parameters (calcium, phosphorus, creatinine,
albumin, magnesium) and calcium- and phosphorus-creatinine ratio in
single void urine before oral administration of 150,000 IU of an aqueous
solution of cholecalciferol and 7 d after administration.
Results: Median level of 25(OH)D3 at the baseline evaluation was 18.0
[10.2; 27.8] ng/mL, 10 patients (56%) had vitamin D deficiency
(25(OH)D <20 ng/mL) and 6 patients (33%) had vitamin D insufficiency
(25(OH)D 20-29 ng/mL). 25(OH)D3 levels increased significantly on the
7th day after cholecalciferol intake (35.4 [26.4; 41] vs. 18.0 [10.2; 27.8]
ng/mL, p<0.05), median Δ25(OH)D3 was 15.6 [12.7; 18.8] ng/mL and
all patients reached 25(OH)D3 levels >20 ng/mL. We also observed
concordant increase in 3-epi-25(OH)D3 (2.9 [2.4; 3.4] vs. 0.8 [0.5; 1.1]
ng/mL, p<0.05) and 24,25(OH)2D3 (2.4 [1.4; 3.0] vs. 0.9 [0.4; 1.8] ng/
mL, p<0.05), while baseline high normal or modestly elevated
1,25(OH)2D3 levels had an upward trend not reaching a statistic
significance (62 [52; 79] vs. 56 [48; 71] pg/mL, p=0.05). Albumin-
adjusted calcium levels showed clinically insignificant elevation (2.69
[2.59; 2.78] vs. 2.65 [2.57; 2.76] mmol/L, p<0.05), however, total serum
calcium remained stable (p>0.05) and PTH levels decreased (105 [79;
154] vs. 121 [102; 179] pg/mL, p<0.05). Magnesium levels slightly
decreased (0.82 [0.78; 0.86] vs. 0.84 [0.81; 0.89] mmol/L, p<0.05), and
phosphorus, creatinine and albumin serum levels as well as urine
calcium- and phosphorus-creatinine ratio did not change over the
follow-up period (p>0.05).
Conclusion: In patients with primary hyperparathyroidism in the absence
of severe hypercalcemia, cholecalciferol bolus dose has a prompt
favorable effect on vitamin D and PTH levels along with a proper safety
profile of calcium- phosphorus parameters.
Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the Russian Science
Foundation (grant №19-15-00243).
P331
IS KNEE MRI SCAN OVERUSED IN PRIMARY CARE
SETTING?
S. Goh1
1Logan Hospital, Brisbane, Australia
Objective: In Australia, the Medicare Benefits Scheme (MBS) from
2013 provides rebates for adult knee MRI organised by general
practitioners (GPs) for suspected diagnosis of knee pain. This resulted
in unexpected increase in knee MRI scan ordered prior to orthopaedic
specialist referral. We investigate if access to MRI knee prior referral
improves patient management and outcome of knee pain. This study
aimed to determine investigations performed at primary care setting prior
specialist referral for adult knee pain. outline initial treatment of adults
with knee pain prior referral, explain why MRI may not contribute more
than plain radiographs.
Methods: 99 consecutive adults (>40 y) referred for knee pain in 2016-7
to orthopaedic outpatient clinic at Redland Hospital (250 beds, in South
Brisbane). Referral letters, clinical history, assessment (including imaging
report) and management determined at outpatient clinic were recorded.
We determined proportions of patients who had MRI knee scans; knee
MRI with clinical history/findings that fulfil the 2013 MBS criteria;
patients who underwent surgical intervention; knee MRI that affect
patient management different from plain radiographs.
Results: 39% had knee MRI scan as sole imaging before orthopaedic
referral; another 21% had both knee x-ray and MRI. Only 8% of patients
with knee MRI scans fit 2013 MBS criteria, 25% did not provide enough
information. 59% of knee pain were diagnosed as osteoarthritis (OA) by
GP, orthopaedic specialists determined 82% OA as main diagnosis. 13%
underwent surgical intervention, and only 17% knee MRI resulted in a
change in treatment.
Conclusion: Our results were also reflected in other countries where
access to MRI did not ultimately alter GP diagnoses or treatment and
there is over-reliance on knee MRIs, underutilise x-rays. There is an
urgent need to realign GP practice with prevailing guidelines in
investigation modalities for adult knee pain.
P332
P R I M A R Y
C A R E
M A N A G E M E N T
O F
K N E E
OSTEOARTHRITIS PRIOR REFERRAL TO ORTHOPAEDIC
CLINIC AND ITS CONCORDANCE WITH PUBLISHED
NATIONAL GUIDELINES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
S. Goh1
1Logan Hospital, Brisbane, Australia
Objective: Knee pain from osteoarthritis (OA) is a common
musculoskeletal condition managed in primary care. Despite widely
available national guidelines, there is significant variation in treatment
prior to referral to orthopaedic clinic. This study aimed to determine
prevalence of knee OA in adults referred to orthopaedic clinic for knee
pain, define previous treatment prior referral and its concordance with
national guidelines.
Methods: 99 consecutive adults (>40 y) referred for knee pain in 2016-7
to orthopaedic outpatient clinic at Redland Hospital (250 beds, in South
Brisbane) were reviewed over a 12-month period. Referral letters, clinical
history, assessment (including imaging report) and management
determined at outpatient clinic were recorded. For those with referral
diagnosis of OA, prereferral treatment was compared to then current
NHMRC guideline (2009). We consider any management involving at
least 80% of therapies listed by guideline as guideline compliant.
Results: 72% patients referred (51% female, mean 56.2 y) had OA
diagnoses. Most common treatment recorded in referrals is oral analgesics
(12%), 86% referral letters (RL) did not mention any treatment attempted
prior referral. Previous treatment selfreported by patients (SR) revealed oral
analgesic use in 91%, 49% attempted weight loss, 36% tried physiotherapy.
Corroboration of history and treatment of knee OA between RL vs. SR
shows only 24% concurrence. SR treatment is more likely to be compliant
with NHMRC’s recommendation as compared to those recorded by RL
(39% vs. 6%) but neither achieve better than 39% in adherence to
recommendation, hence none of prereferral management were guideline
compliant.
Conclusion: Despite availability of NHMRC’s guideline for knee OA
management for a decade, few patients have adequate experience of
recommended management before referral to specialist clinic. This
S205
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
suggests potential success of conservative measures if instituted by
general practitioners and orthopaedic surgeons, if majority of knee pain
is correctly diagnosed as from OA.
P334
BONE HEALTH EVALUATION ONE YEAR AFTER
A R O M A T A S E I N H I B I T O R S C O M P L E T I O N I N
OSTEOPOROTIC PATIENTS
R. Assadi1
1University of Casablanca, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Anti aromatase inhibitors (AI) used for breast cancer increase
bone loss during their treatment, few studies have assessed BMD after
completing AI treatment. This study aimed to assess changes in BMD one
year after AI completion therapy in postmenopausal patients followed for
breast cancer and treated for secondary OP.
Methods: We conducted a cross-sectional, observational study, which
studied the records of patients followed in the rheumatology department
over 5 y (2016-2020). Inclusion criteria: postmenopausal patients treated
with AI for breast cancer and followed in the rheumatology department at
the specialist consultation for weakening osteopathies for OP and treated
with bisphosphonates (BP). All disturbances in the phosphocalcic status
were corrected before the ODM measurement. Exclusion criteria:
premenopausal patients, or patients with another risk factor for OP,
Patients treated with tamoxifen or other antiosteoporotic treatment. All
of these patients had BMD measurement before starting BP and one year
after AI therapy.
Results: 92 patients were included, the mean age was 54.3 y, all were
postmenopausal and had received a 5-y course of AI for breast cancer.
The mean time between the start of BP and the discovery of OP was 23.4
months and the mean duration of follow-up for OP was 38.9 months. One
year after AI treatment completion, 67 patients had undergone bone status
assessment. It was noted, in all participants, clear improvement in the
mean values of BMD in all the sites: the lumbar spine L1-L4 (+2.85%),
femoral neck (+2.77%) and at the level of the hip. total (+3.05%). The
results of the study are summed up in the Table below.
Conclusion: BP markedly improve bone status in osteoporotic patients
throughout AI treatment. The persistent effect of BP helps to overcome
bone depletion after AI completion, which is a serious side effect of
hormone therapy used for breast cancer (2).
Table. Characteristics of patients
Results
1. General characteristics
Total of patients
92
Mean age
54.3 y
Menopause
100%
Delay before OP diagnosis
23,4 months
Mean duration of follow up for OP
38.9 months
2. BMD characteristics (mean values)
Before BP
Lumbar spine L1-L4
T-score: -3.04 - DMO: 0.702
Femoral neck
T-score: -2.9 - DMO: 0.586
Total hip
T-score: -3.18 - DMO: 0.483
One year after AI completion
Lumbar spine
T-score: -2.01 - DMO: 0.722
Femoral neck
T-score: -1.7 -
DMO: 0.602
Total hip
T-score: -1.06 - DMO: 0.497
References:
1. Handforth C, et al. Calcif Tissue Int 2018;102:251.
2. Yamada K, Kohno N. Clin Calcium 2008;18:507.
P335
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM IN RUSSIA
ACCORDING TO THE ONLINE REGISTRY
A. Eremkina1, E. Kovaleva1, A. Ajnetdinova1, E. Karaseva1, O.
Vikulova1, N. Mokrysheva1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is a widespread
endocrine disorder. The clinical presentation is heterogeneous, from mild
asymptomatic hypercalcemia to the classical complications such as
osteoporosis and low-trauma fractures, fractures, nephrolithiasis/
nephrocalcinosis and hypercalciuria. Other clinical forms of PHPT, such
as normocalcaemic PHPT, are less common. This study aimed to assess
the main characteristics of PHPT patients and to conduct initial analysis
of clinical presentations and management.
Methods: The present study explored retrospective data submitted to the
Russian online PHPT registry (http://pgpt.clin-reg.ru/) between February
2017 and April 2021. The data in the text are presented by median (Me)
and values of the 1st and 3rd quartiles [Q1; Q3], the significance levels in
the range from critical to 0.05 were considered.
Results: The total number of patients in the registry is 4176 from 79
regions of Russian Federation. The average age at the time of diagnosis
was 56.67±13 y. The active phase of the disease at the time of data
submission was registered in 58.8% (2454/4176) and the majority of
patients were symptomatic 71.7% (1760/2454). Among them, renal
manifestations (nephrolithiasis/nephrocalcinosis) were found in 21%,
bone involvement (decreased BMD and fractures) in 36.5%, 37.5% had
the both complications, 5% - no data is available. Patients with the
symptomatic PHPT had significantly higher serum PTH and calcium
levels compared to mild course of disease: 150 pg/ml[103; 243], 2.74
mmol/l[2.62; 2.9] vs. 117 pg/ml [90.48; 164], 2.67 mmol/l [2.57; 2.77]
respectively (p<0.05 for all). 669 patients meet the clinical criteria of
MEN-1 and MEN-2A syndromes, the average age 43.62±15.9 y.
Genetic testing in 114 people(2.7%) showed the mutation MEN1 in
1.7% of cases (71/4176) and in the CDC73 gene in 0.14% of cases
(6/4176), 7 patients presented with a combination of PHPT and medullary
thyroid cancer. The incidence of parathyroid cancer was 1.9% (78/4176)
based on postsurgical morphological examination. Summary surgery has
been performed in 57.97% of patients (2421/4176). Remission was
achieved in 92.3% of cases (2234/2421). Recurrence after the first
surgery occurred in 7.7% more often among hereditary form.
Conclusion: According to the Russian registry, the symptomatic course
with severe renal and bone manifestations is dominant. At this stage, it is
necessary to introduce routine calcium screening to detect PHPT on early
stages.
P336
ASSESSMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS RISK IN BREAST
CANCER PATIENTS: ABOUT 200 CASES
R. Assadi1
1University of Casablanca, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Breast cancer is the most common cancer affecting women
both before and after the menopause. The therapeutic used
(chemotherapy, radiotherapy and hormone therapy) can be responsible
for deleterious effects on the bone leading to secondary osteoporosis (1).
This study aimed to assess the bone status and the frequency of
osteoporosis (OP) in patients followed for breast cancer.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective study in the rheumatology
department over 5 y (2016-2020). Inclusion criteria: Patients followed
S206
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
for breast cancer in the oncology department and referred to the
rheumatology department for the weakening osteopathies consultation
for bone evaluation. OP was considered when the T-score at the 3 sites
(lumbar spine, femoral neck and total hip) is <-2. The phosphocalcic
anomalies were corrected before the measurement of BMD. All these
patients underwent BMD measurement and phosphocalcic assessment.
Results: 200 patients were included, the average age was 61.25 y (37-82
y) with an average age of discovery of the cancer was 58.12 y. 98% of
patients were postmenopausal and 29% of them had menopause after
treatment. The other risk factors for OP were: long-term corticosteroid
therapy (13%) and dysthyroidism (9.6%). 98% of patients were treated by
surgery, 84.6% by chemotherapy, 70% by radiotherapy and 94% by
hormone therapy, of which 85% were treated with anti-aromatase and
15% with tamoxifen. The mean time from starting adjuvant therapy and
diagnosing OP was 23.4 months. 136 patients (68%) had OP, lumbar
spine was affected in 86% of cases with a mean T-score of -2.98 and
mean BMD at 0.854. Osteoporotic patients were treated with
bisphosphonates, 50% of which received alendronate, 19% risedronate
and 17% zoledronate in addition to dietary measures and correction of
phosphocalcic anomalies. Results are summed up in the Table below.
Conclusion: Breast cancer patients under treatment are at risk of OP,
because of the age of onset of cancer, menopause secondary to
chemotherapy, corticosteroid therapy and estrogen depletion induced by
hormone therapy (1). The frequency of OP in patients followed for breast
cancer is 27.5% (2), the frequency in our series is estimated at 68% this
can be explained by the profile of patients treated in a hospital
environment with several risk factors.
Whatever the antineoplasic therapy used, the evaluation of bone status is
systematic during the course of and at the end of treatment and especially
in the presence of other OP risk factors.
References:
1. Bjarnasonn H, et al. Acta Oncol 2008;47:747.
2. Lipton A, et al. SM Cancer 2017;123:2444.
Table. Characteristics of patients
Results
Total patients
200
Mean age
61.25 y
Mean age of breast cancer diagnosis
58.12 y
Postmenopausal patients
98%
Menopause secondary to treatment
29%
Treatment
Surgery
98%
Chemotherapy
84.6%
Radiotherapy
70%
Hormonotherapy
94%
Mean delay before OP diagnosis
23.4 months
Osteoporotic patients
136 (68%)
Osteopenic patients
7 (7.6%)
Sites of OP
Lumbar spine
88%
Femoral neck
17%
Total hip
14%
Bisphosphonate therapy
Alendronate
60%
Risedronate
17%
Zoledronate
12%
P337
BONE STATUS OF POSTMENOPAUSAL PATIENTS TREATED
WITH HORMONETHERAPY FOR BREAST CANCER: ABOUT
200 CASES
R. Assadi1
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Ibn Rochd Hospital, University of Casablanca,
Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Hormone therapy used to treat a breast cancer worsens bone
depletion during treatment, especially in postmenopausal women (1).
This study aimed to assess the bone status and the frequency of
osteoporosis (OP) in postmenopausal patients followed for breast cancer
and treated with hormone therapy (HTT).
Methods: We conducted a retrospective study in the rheumatology
department over 5 y (2016-2020). Inclusion criteria: postmenopausal
patients treated with HTT for breast neoplasm in the oncology department
and referred to the rheumatology department for the specialist
consultation for weakening osteopathies for bone evaluation. Exclusion
criteria: premenopausal patients with another risk factor of OP. OP was
considered when the T-score at the 3 sites (lumbar spine, femoral neck
and total hip) was <-2 and osteopenia was considered when the T-score is
between -1 and -2 at the different sites. All of these patients underwent a
measurement of BMD, and all phosphocalcic disturbances were corrected
before the BMD measurement.
Results: 200 patients were included, The average age was 54.3 y (39-75
y) with an average age of the discovery of breast cancer at 56.12 y, the
average time between the start of adjuvant treatment and the first
specialist consultation of bone was 23.4 months. 196 patients (98%) were
postmenopausal, of which 29% had menopause secondary to treatment.
175 (89.3%) cases received HTT treatment of which 85% were treated
with anti-aromatase and 15% with tamoxifen. 126 patients (76%) had OP
and 42 participants (24%) had osteopenia, 7 (4%) patients had normal
BMD. The lumbar spine was affected in 74% of cases with a mean T-
score of -2.87 and mean BMD of 0.889. The neoplasm was metastatic in
15% of patients, 85% of whom had bone metastases and 15% had visceral
ones. Osteoporotic patients were treated with bisphosphonates of which
60% received alendronate, 16% risedronate and 12% zoledronate. the
results are summed up in the Table below.
Conclusion: Patients followed for breast neoplasm under HTT are
exposed to the risk of OP (2). The frequency of OP in our series is
estimated at 76% and osteopenia is estimated at 42%.
Management of osteoporotic and even osteopenic patients treated with HTT
for breast cancer requires the identification of other risk factors of OP, the
correction of calcium and vitamin D deficiencies, hygienic dietary
measures, the prescription of treatment with BP as recommended and a
long-term monitoring of bone status during and after therapy completion.
References:
1. Ramchand SK, et al. J Endocrinol 2019;241:R111.
2. Lipton A, et al. SM Cancer 2017;123:2444.
Table. Characteristics of patients
Results
1.
General characteristics
Total patients
200
Average age
54.3 y
Average age of breast cancer diagnosis
56.12 ys
Average time before bone loss diagnosis
23.4 months
Total postmenopausal patients
196 (98%)
Cancer metastase
15.18%
Bone
85%
Visceral
15%
S207
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Patients treated with HTT
175 (89.3%)
Aramotase inhibitors
148.75 (85%)
Tamoxifen
26.25 (15%)
2.
BMD characteristics
Osteoporosis
126 patients (76%)
Osteopenia
42 patients (24%)
Normal
7 patients (4%)
Sites of OP
Lumbar spine
74%
Femoral neck
23%
Total hip
17%
3.
Bisphosphonate therapy
Alendronate
60%
Risedronate
16%
Zoledronate
12%
P338
PAGET’S DISEASE: REAL-LIFE EXPERIENCE FROM AN
INSTITUTION SPECIALIZED IN BONE METABOLISM IN
LATIN AMERICA
M. Sarli1, M. D. Colacelli2, F. Jerkovich1, P. Rey1, R. Spivacow1, M. B.
Zanchetta1
1IDIM, Universidad del Salvador, 2Maestría en Osteología, Universidad
del Salvador, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Objective: The epidemiology of Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) has
changed in the last years but there is no update data on its clinical
presentation, diagnosis and management in Latin America. Our aim
was to describe its clinical features, diagnostic evaluation and responses
to treatment in a group of PDB patients treated in Argentina.
Methods: We assessed all patients attending our institution that
specializes in bone diseases, from June 2012 to December 2019. We
reviewed the clinical records and laboratory findings of all the patients
diagnosed with PDB followed up for more than a year after diagnosis.
Results: The frequency of PDB was 1.68%. Median age was 67 y (range 39-
97) and 59.5% were women. Most patients were asymptomatic (58.6%) and
had monostotic disease (54.3%). Favorable biochemical responses were
obtained in all patients who were treated with zoledronate (n=36), in 10 out
of 14 treated with pamidronate (71.4%), in 9 out of 10 who received IV
ibandronate (90%) and in 12 out of 13 who took oral bisphosphonates
(92.3%). The response rates were not significantly different when we
compared monostotic vs. polyostotic disease (Table 1). Among the
biochemical parameters, mean values of bone specific and total ALP, and
C-terminal crosslinked telopeptide of type I collagen decreased significantly
after treatment with bisphosphonates. The following complications were
reported: bone deformities, 2.6%; fractures, 3.4%; nerve root compression,
3.4%; arthrosis, 25.8%.
Conclusion: Our cohort of PDB patients was mostly asymptomatic,
monostotic, with a discreet female predominance and low rate of
orthopedic and neurologic complications. Our results reflect the change
in PDB epidemiology towards a more indolent disease.
Table. Drug treatment and responses of treated patients.
Treatment
Monostotic
n=48
Polyostotic
n=25
Total
n=73
p
% of patients under treatment
Zoledronate
21 (43.7%)
15 (60%)
36 (49.3%)
0.223
Pamidronate
10 (20.8%)
4 (16%)
14 (19.2%)
0.759
IV ibandronate
7 (14.6%)
3 (12%)
10 (13.7%)
1.000
10 (20.8%)
3 (12%)
0.522
Oral
bisphosphonates
13
(17.8%)
% of patients with favorable response
Zoledronate
21 (100%)
15 (100%)
36 (100%)
1.000
Pamidronate
7 (70%)
3 (100%)
10 (71.4%)
1.000
IV ibandronate
6 (85%)
3 (100%)
9 (90%)
1.000
Oral
bisphosphonates
10 (100%)
2 (66.7%)
12
(92.3%)
0.231
P339
ONSET OF PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 12 YEARS
AFTER INITIAL DIAGNOSTIC OF GH-PRODUCING
MESOADENOMA
A. Ghemigian1, N. Dumitru1, C. Tupea2, M. Popescu3, E. Petrova1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, Bucharest, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy
Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Syndromic primary hyperparathyroidism (PHP) includes,
among other tumours, the association with growth hormone (GH)
producing tumour causing acromegaly; this combination, namely
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN1) syndrome underlines MENIN
mutations that are not characterised by phenotype – genotype
correlations, thus a particular constellation (in terms of type and timing)
of pituitary and parathyroid adenomas in addition to pancreatic
neuroendocrine neoplasia or other mases like breast tumours, etc. cannot
be anticipated (1-5).
Case report: An adult female with a history of treated acromegaly that
was confirmed with MEN1- related PHP after more than a decade from
initial presentation. This is a 53-year-old who was admitted for
acromegaly serial assessment. The personal medical family is irrelevant.
Her medical background includes: in 2009 she was recognized as
acromegalic based on facial features; the somatopropinoma of 1.1 cm
was referred to selective hypophysectomy with postoperative
uncontrolled disease which required additional radiotherapy which was
added to first line somatostatin analogue octreotide LAR 40 mg/month
and dopamine agonist cabergoline 3 mg/week, and since last 5 y GH
receptor blocker pegvisomant 70 mg/week. The acromegaly was
complicated with mild arterial hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia,
and 5 y ago a mammary tumour of 3 cm was diagnosed; she refused its
biopsy/removal with stationary imaging aspect during follow-up.
Recently, she had her annual evaluation done which showed controlled
acromegaly in terms of mean GH profile of 1.2 ng/mL/24-h (normal<2.5
ng/mL); nadir GH during 75 g oral glucose tolerance test of 0.72 ng/mL
(normal <1 ng/mL) and IGF-1=296 ng/mL (normal: 51-233), but,
opposite to prior assays, PHP-related hypercalcemia was confirmed: total
serum calcium of 10.4 mg/dL (normal: 8.5-10.2 mg/dL), PTH=88 pg/mL
(normal: 15-65 pg/mL), 25OHD=25 ng/mL, normal bone turnover
markers and BMD at DXA, no kidney stones. For the moment, hydration,
daily 1000 UI cholecalciferol is added to acromegaly regime.
Conclusion: Acromegaly requires lifelong surveillance of MEN1
syndrome elements, especially in young adults.
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Maturitas 2009;62:98.
2.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
3.
Gheorghisan-Galateanu AA, et al. J Pak Med Assoc 2017;67:917.
4.
Gheorghiu M, et al. Acta Endocrinologica-Bucharest 2009;5:371.
5.
Poiana C, et al. Bone Res 2013;1:275.
P340
ETHICAL JUSTIFICATION OF APPLYING DXA ANALYSIS IN
CHILDREN WITH MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS
J. S. Nurković1, P. Petković2, V. Marković2, A. Habibović3, R. Vojinović4
1Center for Regeneration & Rehabilitation, Novi Pazar, 2Radiology
Dept., Clinical Center Kragujevac, Kragujevac, 3General Hospital, Novi
S208
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Pazar, 4Radiology Dept., Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kragujevac,
Serbia
Objectives: Performing DXA analysis is not a common part of the
diagnostic process in children. However, it is known that reduced
physical activity affects bone metabolism and antigravity muscles. This
study aimed to evaluate BMD in children with musculoskeletal disorders
(MD) and the ethical justification of applying DXA analysis in these
children.
Methods: In this monocentric retrospective analysis, data were collected
from children and adolescents with cerebral palsy, juvenile idiopathic
arthritis, Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease, muscular dystrophy, spina bifida,
and syringomyelia, who were treated for a primary illness for three years.
A clinical examination, which included a DXA scan, recommended by
the multidisciplinary team, was performed. After applying inclusion and
exclusion criteria, 92 scans remained for statistical analysis. BMD and Z-
scores for the lumbar spine (LS), and hip right and left femoral neck (RFN
and LFN, respectively), and total hip (TH) were recorded.
Results: The average age of children with MD when DXA analysis was
first performed was about 8 y. The BMD (mean±SD) at LS of all patients
was 0.565±0.21, at RFN 0.602±0.26, at LFN 0.596±0.24, and at TH
0.578±0.22. The values of the Z-score (mean±SD) at LS of all patients
were -2.4±0.3, at RFN -2.32±0.19, at LFN -2.25±0.3, and at TH -2.3
±0.31. There was no statistical significance between gender; however,
BMI, walking ability, fracture history, and regular physical treatment
had a significant impact on BMD and Z-score values of these children.
Conclusion: The results of our study clearly indicate that children with
MD have a higher risk of low BMD, osteoporosis, and bone fractures,
which makes it ethically justifiable to perform the DXA analysis in these
children.
P341
ADVANCED PRP PROCEDURE INCREASES KNEE
CARTILAGE THICKNESS
J. S. Nurković1
1Center for Regeneration & Rehabilitation, Novi Pazar, Serbia
Objective: The successful assessment of osteoarthritis (OA) progression
and the results of applied therapy can be determined by objective methods
of damage monitoring, and one of them is an ultrasound measurement of
cartilage thickness. The aim of the study was to determine whether and
how the diameter cartilage of the knee changes after the advanced
platelet-rich plasma (a-PRP) procedure.
Methods: The study included 150 patients who underwent the a-PRP
procedure in 2018 and 2019 at the Center for Regeneration &
Rehabilitation in Novi Pazar, Serbia. After explaining the procedure,
adequate preparation, and consent, the a-PRP procedure was performed
in patients with II and III degrees knee OA. The diameter cartilage of
knees was measured with a linear probe of frequency 7-12 MHz in the
position of flexion of the knee joints at 90°. Three values of cartilage
thickness were recorded: on the medial condyle (MC), on the lateral
condyle (LC), and the intercondylar part (ICP) before the a-PRP
procedure and 3, 6, and 12 months after the a-PRP procedure.
Results: The cartilage thickness was significantly greater at all 3
measurement sites after 3, and 6 months from the a-PRP procedure in
76% of patients (p<0.05), and after 12 months the diameter increased and
was maintained in a total of 112 subjects. The largest increase occurred in
LC (p<0.01). No statistically significant increase in cartilage thickness
was observed in 28 patients, and the diameter decreased in 10 patients.
None of the patients had side effects.
Conclusion: The ultrasound measured cartilage knee diameter increases
after 3, 6, and 12 months of the a-PRP procedure, making this procedure a
therapeutic choice for the treatment of knee OA.
P342
COVID-19 IMPACT ON BONE MINERAL DENSITY
J. S. Nurković1
1Center for Regeneration & Rehabilitation, Novi Pazar, Serbia
Objective: COVID-19 pandemic, infection, and lockdown led to the
impact on physical activity, regular training, and fitness of people around
the globe. This phenomenon has led to short-term as well as long-term
bone and muscle health implications. We performed a case-control study
to evaluate the effect of COVID-19 infection on BMD in Novi Pazar city
people.
Methods: The cases were hospitalized patients with confirmed COVID-
19 with treatment longer than 2 weeks. Each patient was matched with
healthy individuals for age, gender, and BMI. All our patients were
without secondary causes or medications that might affect bone density.
After 3 months of cure, BMD and Z-scores for the lumbar spine (LS), and
hip right and left femoral neck (RFN and LFN, respectively), and total hip
(TH) were recorded.
Results: 30 COVID-19 recovered patients (15 male, 15 female) and 30
(15 male, 15 female) controls were studied. The mean age of the cases and
the controls was 43.5 (SD 12.2) years and the mean BMI was 25.1 (SD 8).
The results of crude odds ratios analyses indicated that COVID-19
infection was associated with a high risk of reduction of BMD: OR
2.31 (95%CI, 1.32–3.43). Lockdown had also a significant effect on
increasing the osteoporosis risk (ORs: 1.92 (95%CI, 1.11–3.38) and
2.12 (95%CI, 1.23–3.11)). After multiple regression analysis, COVID-
19 infection and being quarantined due to infection or fear of infection
remained both independent factors that increased the osteoporosis risk
(ORs: 1.95 (95%CI, 1.26–3.76) and 2.08 (95%CI, 1.11–4.13)
respectively).
Conclusion: Our study suggested that in Novi Pazar city people COVID-
19 infection increased the risk of osteoporosis. Further studies are
required to evaluate the clinical impact of the above findings and to clarify
the status of vitamin D among people in Novi Pazar.
P343
ULTRASOUND-GUIDED INJECTION OF PLATELET-RICH
PLASMA IN KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
J. S. Nurković1
1Center for Regeneration & Rehabilitation, Novi Pazar, Serbia
Objective: The efficacy of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) in the treatment
and healing of knee osteoarthritis (KOA) through stimulation of cell
proliferation and reducing inflammation has been demonstrated by both
in vitro and in vivo studies. The aim of this study is to evaluate the
effectiveness of ultrasound (US)-guided autologous advanced PRP
injections in KAO with Kellgren-Lawrence grades 2–3.
Methods: Autologous PRP was isolated from peripheral arterial blood,
previously stimulated by a low-level laser (LLL) and electromagnetic
field (EMF), and was injected under US-guidance into the knee, by an
anteromedial approach, under conditions of sterility (185 knees) in 100
prospectively selected patients (42 males, 58 females, mean age 48±16 y,
range 29–69 y), during the first half of 2019. Patients were examined for
range of motion, improvements in VAS scale, WOMAC score, Lequesne
index (LI), ambulation speed, and medical outcomes study 36 short-form
(SF-36) health survey 7, 3 days, 3 and 6 months after intra-articular
application of PRP.
Results: 30 days after PRP injection the patients presented first minor
improvements in clinical symptoms. At the 6-month follow-up VAS,
WOMAC, and LI score significantly decreased, and ambulation speed
and SF-36 increased. US evaluation revealed an increase in cartilage
thickness, associated with a reduction in synovial hyperplasia, and
reduced hypervascularity at power Doppler. There were no PRP-a-
related adverse events during and after the interventions.
S209
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: PRP injection in KAO results in a significant improvement
of clinical symptoms and functionality, thereby slowing down the
degenerative process of joint decay. US guidance allows PRP injection
into the knee with great accuracy.
P344
CONGENITAL BILATERAL RADIOULNAR SYNOSTOSIS -
CASE REPORT: GRANDFATHER, SON, AND GRANDSON
J. S. Nurković1
1Center for Regeneration & Rehabilitation, Novi Pazar, Serbia
Objective: Congenital bilateral radioulnar synostosis (CRUS) is a rare
condition, characterized by an osseous or fibrous fusion of the radius and
ulna present at birth, resulting in functional deficits of the elbow joints.
Case report: A 68-year-old retired salesman, his son, and grandson, all
three of them with this rare condition, whose bilateral limited mobility of
the elbow joints has been clinically proven, after which the radiographic
and CT imaging was performed, confirming the presence of this bone
condition. 3D reconstruction has provided a detailed spatial visualization
of the existing malformations and the reciprocal anatomical relationships
between the bone structures. The treatment can be conservative or
surgical, depending on the elbow joint's degree and range of motion.
When deciding the course of treatment, diagnostic imaging results,
especially those of MDCT with 3D and multiplanar reconstruction are
extremely valuable.
Conclusion: CRUS is a rare malformation treated conservatively or
surgically, depending on the elbow joint's degree and range of motion.
When deciding the course of treatment, imaging diagnostics is invaluable.
P345
FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH SPONTANEOUS FALLING IN
OLDER ADULTS: RESULTS OF THE BUSHEHR ELDERLY
HEALTH PROGRAM
K. Khalagi1, N. Fahimfar1, M. Sanjari1, G. Shafiee2, S. Gharibzadeh3, N.
Panahi1, M. J. Mansourzadeh1, R. Heshmat2, I. Nabipour4, B. Larijani5,
A. Ostovar1
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
2Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 3Dept. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Pasteur Institute of
Iran, Tehran, 4The Persian Gulf Marine Biotechnology Research
Center, The Persian Gulf Biomedical Sciences Research Institute,
Bushehr University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, 5Endocrinology
Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical Sciences
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Spontaneous fall is one of the causes of fractures in people
with osteoporosis. This study aimed to investigate the factors associated
with spontaneous fall among people ≥60 y in southern Iran.
Methods: The baseline data of 2424 samples from the second stage of the
first phase of a prospective cohort, the Bushehr Elderly Health (BEH)
program [1, 2] was included in the analysis. A history of spontaneous fall
in the year before the recruitment was measured by selfreport using a
standardized questionnaire. Demographic characteristics, as well as the
history of osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, low back pain, Alzheimer’s
disease, epilepsy, depression, and cancer, were measured using
standardized questionnaires. Tandem gait (heel-to-toe) exam, as well as
laboratory tests, was performed under standard conditions. A logistic
regression model was used in the analysis and the multiple model was
fitted backwardly using Hosmer and Lemeshow strategy [3].
Results: Mean (standard deviation) of the participants’ age was 69.34
(6.4) y (range: 60-96 y), and 48.06% of the participants were men. 260
subjects of the 2,424 participants reported a spontaneous fall in the year
before the recruitment (10.7%, 95%CI (9.5-12.0)%). The result of the
bivariate and multiple analysis of the association between potential risk
factors and spontaneous fall were presented in Table.
Conclusion: Adjusted for potential confounders, having epilepsy, cancer,
depression, low back pain, and osteoarthritis increase the risk of
spontaneous fall in older adults. Ability to stand ≥10 s in the tandem gait
exam, being men, and having physical activity and high serum
triglyceride reduce the risk of fall.
References:
1.
Ostovar A, et al. BMJ Open 2015;5:e009597.
2.
Shafiee G, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e013606.
3.
Jewell NP. Statistics for epidemiology: Chapman and Hall/CRC;
2003.
4.
Aadahl M, Jørgensen T. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2003;35:1196.
Table. Factors associated with last year spontaneous falling in older
adults; results from simple and multiple logistic regression analysis.
Risk factor
Crude ORa
(95%CI)
P value
Adjusted ORa
(95%CI)
P value
Age (y)
60-64
1
-
1
-
65-69
0.69 (0.49-0.96)
0.03
0.62 (0.44-0.88)
0.01
70-74
0.70 (0.45-1.08)
0.10
0.59 (0.38-0.93)
0.02
75-79
1.28 (0.85-1.93)
0.24
1.00 (0.64-1.55)
0.99
80-84
1.09 (0.64-1.88)
0.75
0.84 (0.47-1.51)
0.56
˃85
1.54 (0.79-3.00)
0.21
1.08 (0.53-2.23)
0.83
Sex (Male)
0.44 (0.33-0.58)
<0.001
0.60 (0.44-0.81)
0.001
Education
No education
1
-
-
-
Primary school
0.97 (0.73- 1.31)
0.86
-
-
Guidance school
0.53 (0.30-0.93)
0.03
-
-
High school
0.66 (0.42-1.02)
0.06
-
-
Academic
0.53 (0.29-0.97)
0.04
-
-
High cholesterolb
1.25 (0.96-1.63)
0.10
-
-
High LDLc
1.22 (0.95-1.58)
0.12
-
-
High triglycerided
0.81 (0.61-1.07)
0.14
0.72 (0.53-0.97)
0.03
Osteoporosise
1.57 (1.21-2.03)
0.001
-
-
Osteoarthritis
1.83 (1.31-2.55)
<0.001
1.49 (1.05-2.11)
0.02
Rheumatoid arthritis
2.86 (1.47-5.56)
0.002
-
-
Low back pain
2.17 (1.65-2.86)
<0.001
1.79 (1.33-2.40)
<0.001
Alzheimer’s
2.10 (0.78-5.65)
0.14
-
-
Epilepsy
3.91 (1.47-10.37)
0.006
4.31 (1.54-12.07)
0.005
S210
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Depression
2.20 (1.34-3.62)
0.002
1.81 (1.08-3.06)
0.02
Cancer
3.12 (1.30-7.50)
0.01
2.73 (1.09-6.84)
0.03
Physical activityf
0.60 (0.42-0.85)
0.004
0.69 (0.48-0.99)
0.046
Tandem gait exam
No standing
1
-
1
-
Standing <10 s
0.74 (0.47-1.15)
0.18
0.86 (0.54-1.37)
0.54
Standing ≥10 s
0.37 (.27 – 0.50)
<0.001
0.49 (0.35-0.69)
<0.001
a: Prevalence odds ratio
b: Total cholesterol ≥200 mg/d.
c: Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ≥110 mg/dL
d: Serum triglyceride ≥150 mg/dL
e: Measured by BMD using the DXA method by a Hologic Discovery
machine. It was defined as a T-score ≤-2.5 (in any sex compared to the
ideal BMD of a young healthy white person of the same sex) at any site
(total hip, spine, or neck of femur).
f: Measured using Aadahl et al. physical activity questionnaire [4].
P346
IMPACT OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS ON THE EVOLUTION OF
BONE MINERAL DENSITY
J. Terrier1, O. Le Rouzic1, J. Paccou1, A. Prevotat1, B. Cortet1, I.
Legroux1
1University of Lille, Lille, France
Objective: Cystic fibrosis (CF) can induce osteoporosis, and increases
the risk of fractures. The objective of this study was to determine the
prevalence of osteoporosis in a cohort of patients followed at the Lille
University Hospital, and its evolution over time. We also analyzed the
risk factors influencing bone loss, as well as the impact of an
antiosteoporosis therapy or a chloride channel modulator (lumacaftor/
ivacaftor).
Methods: Single-center, descriptive study carried out on adult patients
with CF, followed between 2010-2020. The evaluation comprised bone
assessment including BMD measurement, biological assessment focused
on calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, PTH and pneumologic assessment.
Also collection of clinical and laboratory parameters were evaluated at
two different stages, spaced on average 7±3 y.
Results: 119 patients were included and among them 10% were treated
with antiosteoporotic drugs, whereas 25.2% were treated with lumacaftor/
ivacaftor. The prevalence of osteoporosis by DXA at baseline was 8.4%,
and 12.6% at the end of the study period respectively. BMD significantly
decreased over time at the femoral neck (-6%, p<0.001), and at the total
hip (-2%, p<0.001) but not at the lumbar spine. BMD changes at the
femoral neck were significantly associated with the decrease of forced
vital capacity, and also the presence of diabetes at baseline (p<0.05 and
p<0.01, respectively). BMD changes were not different for patients who
were receiving antiosteoporotic drugs and those who were not. The
figures were the same for lumacaftor/ivacaftor.
Conclusion: Our data demonstrate a decrease in BMD at the femoral
neck and at the hip in CF related to the severity of respiratory involvement
and the presence of diabetes. Other studies are required for explaining the
absence of efficacy of antiosteoporotic drugs in this cohort of patients
with CF.
P347
ULTRASOUND CHARACTERIZATION OF THE PLANTAR
FASCIA: A COMPARATIVE STUDY BETWEEN PATIENTS
WITH SPONDYLOARTHRITIS, HIGH-IMPACT ATHLETES
AND HEELED SHOE WEARERS
C. A. Guillén-Astete1, C. Pijoán-Moratalla1, L. Seghers-Aguilar2, N.
García-Montes1, S. Espejo-Polidura2
1Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, 2CEU San Pablo, Madrid, Spain
Objective: The plantar fascia is one of the most frequently affected
enthesal territories in patients with spondyloarthritis. Plantar fasciitis,
not related to these diseases, is also a frequent pathology linked to
alterations in the biomechanics of plantar bearing. The plantar fascia,
moreover, is one of the most relevant structures in the plantar flexion of
the foot and, therefore, must support the load of body weight in high-
impact sports. Although plantar fasciitis is defined clinically, it is noted by
demonstrating an increase in its thickness. The purpose of the present
study is to determine whether there are differences between the plantar
fasciae of healthy subjects, high-impact athletes, heel wearers, and
patients with spondyloarthritis (with plantar fascia involvement).
Methods: Between December 2019 and January 2020, sedentary healthy
volunteers (medical students and relatives), basketball and volleyball
players, female workers in a department store and heel wearers (> 4cm,
>5 h/wk, >1 y) and patients with known diagnosis of spondyloarthritis
and plantar fascia involvement were recruited. An ultrasound
examination of the plantar fascia of the dominant foot was performed in
the longitudinal axis at the edge of the calcaneus and 10mm distal to it. To
exclude changes attributable to age, volunteers under 35 years of age
were included. The ultrastructure of the fascia was dichotomously
assessed as normal or altered. All scans were performed by an expert
sonographer unrelated to the type of volunteer being scanned.
Results: 46 sedentary volunteers (<2 h of weekly exercise), 42 federated
basketball and volleyball players, 58 female heel wearers and 26 patients
diagnosed with spondyloarthritis and plantar fasciitis were included.
Table 1 summarizes the demographic and anthropometric characteristics
of the included subjects. Plantar fascia thicknesses in the longitudinal axis
at the edge of the calcaneus are shown in Table 2. No statistically
significant differences were identified between the tendon thickness of
patients and high-impact athletes. Statistically significant differences
were identified in the comparisons between the remaining three height
means, depicted in Figure 1. The proportion detecting altered
echostructure occurred in 76.9% of patients, 38% of high-impact athletes,
and 10.3% of heel wearers and 8.6% of sedentary people. Statistical
comparison of these proportions is shown in Figure 1.
Conclusion: The ultrasound changes observed in the plantar fascia in
patients with spondyloarthritis and plantar fasciitis are similar to those
presented by high-impact athletes both in terms of altered ultrastructure
and fascial thickness. According to these results, it is advisable to know
the sports history of patients with suspected spondyloarthritis or under
follow-up for this diagnosis when evaluating the plantar fascia
ultrasonographically.
Table 1.
Table 2.
S211
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure 1.
P348
STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN THE ACHILLES TENDON AND
RETRO ACHILLES BURSA INDUCED BY EXERCISE IN
HEALTHY SUBJECTS
C. A. Guillén-Astete1, M. Pozo-Notario2, P. A. Zurita-Prada3, C. Urrego-
Laurín3, N. García-Montes1
1Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, 2Europeran University of Madrid,
3HLA Moncloa University Hospital, Madrid, Spain
Objective: The Achilles tendon (AT) is the largest and most traction-
resistant tendon in the body. These anatomical characteristics and its ease
of exploration make this tendon a structure of interest in the study of
patients with suspected spondyloarthritis. Like other load-bearing
tendons, devoid of its own synovium, the Achilles tendon requires the
cushioning of a bursa. The retro Achilles bursa (ARB) is a paratendinous
structure lined with synovial tissue.
Both the AT and the ARB are structures with the ability to adapt to
biomechanical demand. Knowing the behavior of these structural
modifications would allow us to understand to what extent changes in
tendon architecture and bursa size can be considered physiological. The
aim of the present study was to determine, in terms of
ultrasonographically assessable structural changes, the physiological
response of the AT and ARB to regular and controlled physical exertion.
Methods: An observational, longitudinal-retrospective study was
performed using data obtained in a previous study. For this study, 116
young volunteers (20-30 years old) were enrolled throughout 2019 by
means of posters placed in three sports centers in the northeastern area of
Madrid (Alcobendas, San Sebastián de Los Reyes), who previously did
not exercise more than 1 d/wk with the lower body. Subjects were
excluded if they declared having a diagnosis of immune-mediated
rheumatologic diseases or first-degree relatives with these diagnoses.
Volunteers were instructed a training regimen (running) of 60'/d, 5d/wk.
The research team encouraged the participants interweekly to perform the
routine aiming to reach 140% of basal HR. At the beginning and end of
the exercise period, an ultrasound examination of AT and ARB was
performed. The outcome variables were the gradient of the longitudinal
and transverse thickness of the AT and the height of the ARB. The
independent variables were the gradients of the subjects' anthropometric
measurements. The working hypothesis was that the greater the
anthropometric change of the individual, the greater the structural
changes that should be expected in the AT and the ARB.
Results: Of the 116 volunteers studied, 72 (62.1%) were male. Median
age 24 RIC [4.50]. Basal BMI 21.8±2.88 g/m2. Basal muscle mass
percentage (% lean mass) was 33.06±6.48%. Table 1 summarizes the
anthropometric characteristics of the volunteers and the results of the
ultrasound examinations before and after the exercise routine. Table 2
presents the results of the bivariate correlation tests between the
anthropometric changes: percentage muscle mass gain and increase in
the circumference of the dominant calf, with the structural variations of
AT and ARB. In all correlations, statistically significant differences were
demonstrated in both sexes.
Conclusion: Regulated physical exercise produces detectable
morphological changes in AT and ARB architecture. The anthropometric
modifications induced by exercise in the individual correlate with the
magnitude of these changes.
P349
A NEW PROPOSAL TO REDUCE ATYPICAL FEMORAL
FRACTURES
I. P. Papaioannou1, G. P. Pantazidou2, T. R. Repantis1, A. B. Baikousis1,
P. K. Korovessis1
1Orthopedic Dept. of General Hospital of Patras, 2University of Patras,
Public Health Postgraduate Program, Patras, Greece
Objective: Atypical femur fracture (AFF), which is a rare type of fracture
that has been associated with the long-term use of potent antiresorptive
bone medications, is a potentially devastating consequence of
osteoporosis treatment. AFF pathogenesis is associated with mechanical
and biological mechanisms of cortical bone. This study highlights the
patient group that is at high risk for development of this complication
from the biomechanical point of view.
Methods: We retrospectively studied cases with atypical femoral
fractures in the last 5 y. We retrieved 7 cases, 5 female and 2 male patients.
4/7 patients had diaphyseal AFF, while the rest had subtrochanteric AFF.
All of them were treated with alendronate for osteoporosis. Mean age of
these patients was 69.7 years old. We examined the radiographs and
evaluated the diaphyseal lateral femoral bowing angle and femoral
neck-shaft angle to clarify if increased femoral lateral bowing (>5.25°)
or decreased femoral neck-shaft angle (<125°), are associated with
increased risk for diaphyseal and subtrochanteric AFFs respectively.
Results: All patients with diaphyseal AFFs had increased lateral femoral
bowing angle and subsequently all patients with subtrochanteric AFFs
S212
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
had decreased neck-shaft angle. Mean lateral femoral bowing was 12.9°
(SD=5.5°), while mean neck-shaft angle was 120.3° (SD= 1.24°). It is
worth-noting that in two cases with excessive lateral femoral bowing
(>15°), surgical procedure was very challenging due to the design of
the intramedullary nail.
Conclusion: Based on current evidence and our results about AFFs, we
conclude that both femoral bowing angle and femoral neck-shaft angle
should be evaluated before bisphosphonates (BPs) administration. Ιn
cases with excessive lateral femoral shaft bowing or decreased femoral
neck-shaft angle, prescription of another antiosteoporotic treatment
should be recommended. If, however, BPs cannot be avoided, clinicians
should be aware of the fact that long-term administration may be
implicated with AFFs occurrence. Short term BPs administration with
timely drug holiday between three and five years may be reasonable.
Roentgenographic evaluation of both femurs every six months and
medical reference in case of any emerging thigh pain can prevent AFFs.
Larger studies are urgently needed to confirm or contradict this statement.
P350
IS DIABETES MELLITUS TYPE 2 A RISK FACTOR FOR
FRAGILITY HIP FRACTURES?
I. P. Papaioannou1, G. P. Pantazidou2, Z. K. Kokkalis3, N. G.
Georgopoulos4, E. J. Jelastopulu5, P. K. Korovessis1
1Orthopedic Dept. of General Hospital of Patras, 2University of Patras,
Public Health Postgraduate Program, 3Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical
School, University of Patras, 4Endocrinology, University of Patras,
5Dept. of Public Health, University of Patras, Patras, Greece
Objective: Current evidence supports that individuals with diabetes
mellitus type 2 (T2DM) are more vulnerable to fragility fractures,
although elderly patients with osteoporotic and especially hip fractures
haven’t receive the appropriate proportion of the publishing data.
Methods: We retrospectively studied elderly patients (>60 years old)
with low energy hip fractures, which were treated in our department
during the last year between January 2020 and January 2021 to determine
if T2DM consists a worth noting risk factor for fragility hip fractures in
this specific age group. Furthermore, we conducted a systematic review
of the literature concerning elderly with fragility fractures (especially hip
fractures) and the possible impact of T2DM. Finally, we identified 17
records which met our inclusion criteria (elderly patients over 60 years
old accompanied with T2DM and fragility fractures) based on literature
research in PubMed and google scholar.
Results: We retrieved 141 patients over 65 years old with fragility hip
fractures treated in our department, 73 with extracapsular and 68 intra-
capsular, while mean age was 73.66. Among them 41 patients had
T2DM, so a total 29.07% of the elderly with fragility hip fracture were
also diabetic. This finding confirms the fact that diabetic elderly
individuals are at increased risk for hip fractures. The results from our
systematic review concludes that there is almost consensus about the
increased prevalence of all kinds of fragility fractures and especially
low-energy hip fractures among elderly patients with T2DM compared
with their counterparts without T2DM, while there is relative controversy
concerning the nonvertebral fractures. Insulin usage can even double the
risk for fragility fracture.
Conclusion: Bone fragility should be recognized as a new complication
of T2DM, especially in elderly patients. The elderly patients are even
more vulnerable to T2DM-induced bone fragility due to several
additional aggravating factors, which include senile osteoporosis, severe
vitamin D deficiency, presence of many comorbidities, increased
possibility of insulin usage, presence of diabetes-related complications
and especially diabetic neuropathy and retinopathy, predisposing to falls.
Clinicians who treat these patients should be also aware of the special
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches concerning these patients.
P351
IMPLICATIONS OF DEFFICIENT VITAMIN D LEVELS IN
DIABETIC ELDERLY
I. P. Papaioannou1, G. P. Pantazidou2, Z. K. Kokkalis3, N. G.
Georgopoulos4, E. J. Jelastopulu5
1Orthopedic Dept. of General Hospital of Patras, 2University of Patras,
Public Health Postgraduate Program, 3Orthopedic Surgery, Medical
School, University of Patras, 4Endocrinology, University of Patras,
5Dept. of Public Health, University of Patras, Patras, Greece
Objective: During the last two decades there has been expanding
evidence describing the implications of vitamin D deficiency (VDD) in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), although until now elderly
have not received the required proportion of the published studies. The
aim of this study is to fill this gap in current literature concerning this
patient group.
Methods: Literature in PubMed and Google Scholar was searched for
relevant articles published up to October 2020. The keywords used were:
VDD, elderly and T2DM. Among 556 articles retrieved, 90 full texts
were eligible and only 34 studies (12 retrospective studies, 2 prospective
cohorts, 3 meta-analyses, 7 cross-sectional studies, 9 randomized control
trials- RCTs, and one observational study) met the inclusion criteria for
the review.
Results: According to this study there is adequate evidence to support the
correlation between VDD and T2DM in elderly. Results from RCTs are
more conflicting, so further studies are necessary to confirm the impact of
VDD supplementation on metabolic, lipid profile, oxidative stress and
complications of T2DM in elderly. VDD is clearly related with severe
retinopathy, diabetic peripheral neuropathy and poor cognition
performance, while there is consensus about the beneficial effect of
vitamin D (VD) on peripheral artery disease, foot ulceration prevention
and wound healing. However, there is controversy about the effect of VD
supplementation on cardiovascular adverse events, endothelial function
and estimated glomerular filtration rate. Finally, the association of VDD
with fragility fractures and depression in the elderly with T2DM is
currently insufficiently studied and remains controversial.
Conclusion: Undoubtedly, there is definite correlation of VDD with
T2DM in elderly. However, the effect of VD supplementation on
metabolic and lipid profile, oxidative stress and complications of
T2DM in older patients require larger randomized controlled trials.
Definition of the exact threshold of VD levels and the regimen of VD
supplementation is important, although very difficult to be determined.
Based on the small number of studies of this patient group and the
conflicting results in specific points of this topic, there is emerging need
for new well designed studies for elderly with T2DM and VDD.
P352
CAN VITAMIN D AND/OR PTH PREDICT A NEW LOW
ENERGY HIP FRACTURE IN ELDERLY?
I. P. Papaioannou1, G. P. Pantazidou2, T. R. Repantis1, A. B. Baikousis1,
P. K. Korovessis1
1Orthopedic Dept. of General Hospital of Patras, 2University of Patras,
Public Health Postgraduate Program, Patras, Greece
Objective: Vitamin D (VD) deficiency seems to be underestimated,
especially in countries with significant duration of sunlight throughout
the year. This study was conducted to highlight two easily measurable
prognostic factors to identify low energy hip fractures in elderly. These
factors are VD and PTH.
Methods: This study included 63 patients with mean age of 83 y who
sustained hip fracture (Group A) within a year. 64 patients, with average
age of 73 y, who suffered from degenerative hip/knee osteoarthritis or
lumbar spondylosis, were subsequently selected as control group (Group
B). PTH and VD blood levels were measured.
S213
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS statistics. P-value
<0.05 was set as level of statistically significant difference. 93.6% (59/63)
of individuals with hip fracture and 76.5% (49/64) in controls were found
with abnormal VD values (<30 ng/ml). Comparison of vitamin D values
between the total samples of group A and B revealed statistically
significant difference, while both male (p=0.0049) and female
(p<0.0001) patients of group A showed statistically significant lower
VD levels than their counterparts. In addition, increased levels of PTH
were observed in women of group A (p=0.0016), while no statistical
significance was found in males (p=0.7712). Age was an independent
risk factor for VD deficiency in both groups (Group A p=0.04, Group
B p=0.043). Four patients only from group B (6.25%) and none from
group A had undergone blood tests for VD and PTH before hospital
admission.
Conclusion: Our study confirmed that elderly patients with hip fractures
in Greece have less VD adequacy and increased PTH levels comparing
with elderly people with osteoarthritis. Moreover, the study demonstrated
that age constitutes an independent aggravating factor for
hypovitaminosis D among elderly either with hip fracture or osteoarthritis
and this finding should be taken also under consideration by physicians.
Αs hypovitaminosis D concerns the majority of elderly living in this
south-western Mediterranean region, authors suggest VD and PTH
measurements, regardless of annual insolation, to identify and counsel
elderly with increased risk of hip fracture and avoid perioperative
complications in patients who undergo elective orthopedic surgeries.
P353
CAN VITAMIN D AND/OR PTH LEVELS PREDICT HIP
FRACTURE SEVERITY IN ELDERLY?
I. P. Papaioannou1, G. P. Pantazidou2, T. R. Repantis1, A. B. Baikousis1,
P. K. Korovessis1
1Orthopedic Dept. of General Hospital of Patras, 2University of Patras,
Public Health Postgraduate Program, Patras, Greece
Objective: Many studies support that lower vitamin D (VD) and/or
increased PTH levels are associated with hip fracture severity.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated 137 elderly patients with low
energy hip fractures, treated in our department from January 2020 to
January 2021. PTH and 25-hydroxyVD blood levels were measured,
recording type of fracture and fracture severity. We defined severe
subcapital fractures those with grade 3 or 4 according to Garden
classification, while severe intertrochanteric those with grade A2.2,
A2.3 and all A3 fractures according to AO/OTA classification.
Results: 72.26% (99/137) were female, 27.74 (38/137) male. Majority of
men had intertrochanteric fracture (25/38), while 32.32% of women
subcapital (32/99). Mean VD levels were 10.15 (SD 6.63) ng/ml, mean
PTH levels 64.36 (53.38) pg/ml, 30.65% had secondary
hyperparathyroidism and 2 (1.45%) patients efficient VD levels (>30
ng/ml). Mean VD and PTH levels were 10.54±5.949 ng/ml and 47.68
±41.203 pg/ml respectively for male. Values for female were 10.0±6.901
ng/ml and 70.77±56.252 pg/ml. 60.59% had severe VD deficiency (<10
ng/ml), 30.66% VD deficiency (10-20 ng/ml) and 7.30% VD inadequacy.
So, intracapsular fractures are associated with more severe VD deficiency
(9.17±4.962 ng/ml) compared to extracapsular (10.63±7.290 ng/ml).
70.8% (97/137) had severe or comminuted hip fractures, while stable
fractures were 29.2% (40/137). In group with severe hip fracture (97
patients), mean VD was 9.76±6.717 ng/ml and PTH 65.18±56.631 pg/
ml. Furthermore, in this group 63.91% (62/97) had severe VD deficiency,
27.83% (27/97) VD deficiency, 6.18% (6/97) VD inadequacy and 2.08%
(2/97) adequate VD. Conversely, in group with stable hip fractures (40
patients) mean VD was 11.09±6.409 ng/ml and PTH 62.38±45.134 pg/
ml. In this group, 52.50% (21/40) had severe VD deficiency, 37.5% (15/
40) VD deficiency, 10% (4/40) VD inadequacy and no patient with
adequate VD levels. Correlation between PTH and VD with fracture
severity did not reveal statistical significance.
Conclusion: Clinicians should have in mind that severe VD deficiency is
associated with comminuted fracture pattern, intracapsular hip fracture
and female gender.
P354
PHYCHOTRPIC DRUGS, POLYPHARMACY AND HIP
FRACTURES IN ELDERLY: A RETROSPECTIVE STUDY
I. P. Papaioannou1, G. P. Pantazidou2, T. R. Repantis1, A. B. Baikousis1,
P. K. Korovessis1
1Orthopedic Dept. of General Hospital of Patras, 2University of Patras,
Public Health Postgraduate Program, Patras, Greece
Objective: Polypharmacy and use of psychotropic agents are established
risk factors for falls and hip fractures. This retrospective study evaluates
the impact of these factors to PTH, 25-hydroxyvitamin D (VD) blood
levels and fracture severity.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated 76 elderly with fragility hip
fractures. PTH and VD blood levels were measured. Polypharmacy and
intake of psychotropic drugs were recorded. Polypharmacy was defined
the intake of 4 or more drugs, while we included typical and atypical
antipsychotics, tricyclics antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors and benzodiazepines in the group with psychotropic drugs
uptake. We defined severe subcapital fractures those with grade 3 or 4
according to Garden classification, while severe intertrochanteric those
with grade A2.2, A2.3 and all A3 fractures according to AO/OTA
classification.
Results: Mean age of 76 participants was 83.08±7.203. 63.2% (48/76)
sustained extracapsular fractures, while 36.8% (28/76) intracapsular.
Based on our records, 39/76 patients (51.3%) received psychotropic
drugs. Polypharmacy was identified in 77.6% of patients (59/76), 37
females and 22 males. 22.4% of patients (17/76) received 3 or less drugs
per day. In 59 cases associated with polypharmacy, we found 46 (77.9%)
with comminuted fractures and 13 (22.1) with stable fracture pattern,
while in 17 without polypharmacy the incidence of unstable fractures
was 64.7% (11/17). Mean VD levels were 10.35 ng/ml with 4.78 SD
and PTH levels 73.77 pg/ml with SD 64.59 in cases with psychotropic
drugs intake, while values of their counterparts were 11.75±6.27 ng/ml
and 54.11±44.36 pg/ml respectively. Finally, mean VD levels were 9.27
ng/ml with 4.77 SD and PTH levels 65.61 pg/ml with SD 55.22 in cases
associated with polypharmacy, while the values of their counterparts were
11.56±5.71 ng/ml and 59.29±60.83 pg/ml respectively.
Conclusion: Clinicians should be aware that polypharmacy and
psychotropic drugs intake are associated with more unstable hip fractures,
severe VD deficiency and increased levels of PTH. Probably, VD
deficiency and secondary hyperparathyroidism consist adverse effects
of polypharmacy and psychotropic drugs intake. More studies are
necessary to evaluate this thesis.
P355
BONE LOSS AND OSTEOPOROSIS IN OLDER MEN AND
WOMEN FROM THE GAMBIA, WEST AFRICA
C. M. Parsons1, M. Ó Breasail2, L. Jarjou3, A. Zengin4, A. Prentice3, P.
Ebeling4, C. Cooper1, K. A. Ward1
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, UK, 2MRC
Nutrition & Bone Health Group, Cambridge, UK, 3MRC Unit The
Gambia at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Banju,
Gambia, 4Dept. of Medicine, School of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Victoria,
Australia
Objective: Due to an increase in longevity and rapid urbanization in sub-
Saharan Africa (SSA), it is predicted that the incidence of hip fracture will
increase 6-fold in Africa and Asia by 2050. The aims were to describe and
characterize changes in bone mass of older adults and to determine
S214
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
prevalence of osteoporosis and osteopenia in a population accustomed to
low habitual calcium intakes.
Methods: The Gambian Bone and Muscle Ageing Study (GamBAS;
ISRCTN17900679) is a prospective observational study in women and
men from rural Gambia. The primary outcome was change in total hip
aBMD over a 1.5-2 y period (follow-up was randomized to account for
seasonality). A GE-Lunar Prodigy scanner was used to obtain proximal
femur scans for assessment of aBMD. Annualized percentage change in
aBMD was calculated. Total hip BMD T-scores were calculated using
NHANES data and Z-scores were calculated using manufacturer
reference data as per ISCD recommendations. Results are presented as
mean (standard deviation) change.
Results: A total of 383 (54.6% women) had repeat DXA scans (median
follow-up 1.72 y); median age 59, range 40-92 y; BMI men 20.9(3.0) kg/
m2; women 21.9(3.5) kg/m2. At baseline, the mean total hip Z-score was -
0.23(0.98) in men and -0.55(1.06) in women. The mean total hip T-score
in men was 0.05(1.20) and -1.25(1.42) in women. Forty-two (20.6%)
women, and 2 (1.2%) men have osteoporosis, and n=82 (40.2%) women
and 32(18.6%) men osteopenia. Figure shows the mean annualized
percentage change in total hip aBMD.
In men, total hip aBMD changed most after the age of 70 y; -1.10(1.20)
70-74 y; -1.24(0.98) 75+ years. In women, the change in total hip aBMD
change was -0.17(1.19) in 40-44 y; -1.09(1.46) in 45-49 y; -1.22(1.23)
50-54 y; -1.22(1.27) 55-59 y; -0.73(1.31) 60–64 y; -1.22(1.04) 65-69 y; -
1.00(1.36) 70-74 y; -1.50 (1.35) 75+ years.
Conclusion: These are the first longitudinal musculoskeletal DXA data
in an older adult population from SSA. The change at the hip was
comparative to that in higher income countries where fracture risk is high.
Over 40% of women were osteopenic and osteoporotic. These data
provide important insights into musculoskeletal health in the Gambian
population, previously thought to be at low risk of fracture.
Figure. Mean annualized percentage change in total hip aBMD.
P356
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM DUE TO ECTOPIC
PARATHYROID ADENOMA
M. Popescu1, E. Petrova2, M. Ghemigian3, A. Ghemigian2
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Craiova, 2C.I. Parhon
National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University of
Medicine & Pharmacy, Bucharest, 3C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) results from intrinsic
hyperfunction of parathyroid glands; either sporadic or familial. When
due to an ectopic parathyroid tissue, localization and removal are
challenging (1-5).
Case report: We present a 43-year-old female who was referred to the
Endocrinology for symptomatic hypercalcemia. She was diagnosed 4 y
ago with chronic kidney disease, chronic interstitial nephropathy,
multiple episodes of urinary infection and recurrent lithotripsies. While
investigating the etiology of recurrent nephrolithiasis, the diagnosis of
PHPT emerged. The laboratory investigations showed: elevated corrected
serum calcium (13.2 mg/dl) with an intact PTH serum of 620 pg/ml. The
serum phosphate was decreased (2.1 mg/dl) and urinary calcium of 0.25
g/24-h. The assessment of renal function showed serum creatinine of 1.7
mg/dl (GFR=37 ml/min) and serum urea of 57 mg/dl. Bone markers
(osteocalcin, CrossLaps, P1NP) were increased; low 25-
hydroxyvitaminD-14 ng/ml. DXA revealed lumbar T-score of
T-3.53SD, hip (T-3.13 SD), and distal radius (T-4.1 SD). 99mTc
Sestamibi scintigraphy showed: focus of radioactivity in mediastinum
(thymic box), suggesting an ectopic hyperfunctioning parathyroid gland.
Its excision was attempted, but the calcium values increased
progressively and the PTH serum levels remained unchanged.
Therefore, the patient was operated once again one year later. The
histological report confirmed parathyroid ectopic tissue. The patient’s
evolution was favorable (increase in BMD and no more nephrolithiasis).
Conclusion: We reported a case with persistent hyperparathyroidism
after surgery due to an ectopic parathyroid adenoma. This study should
warn on the delayed diagnosis and difficult treatment of an abnormal
localization of the parathyroid adenoma in order to improve the
management of the disorder and the outcome of the patient.
References:
1.
Popescu M, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:2089.
2.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
3.
Ionovici N, et al. Rom J Morphol Embriol 2020;70:129.
4.
Iorga AM, et al. Exp Ther Med 2020;20:2396.
5.
Albulescu DM, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3683.
P357
EXTRASPINAL OSTEOARTICULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF
DIFFUSE IDIOPATHIC SKELETAL HYPEROSTOSIS: ABOUT
54 STUDY PATIENTS
A.-R. Halidou Idrissa1, N. Kawtar1, J. Saadia1
1Rheumatology Dept. of Ibn Rochd CHU, Casablanca Faculty of
Medicine & Pharmacy, Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) or Jacques
Forestier and Jaume Rotés-Quèrol disease, is a non-inflammatory
ossification of entheses. The term hyperostosis is defined by an enlarged
bone, or abnormally thick bones. It takes two (according to Forestier) or
three (according to Resnick) contiguous intervertebral bridges to affirm
hyperostosis, as well as correct discs and the absence of fusion of the
sacroiliac or posterior joints. The diagnosis of DISH is radiological
(frontal views). The peripheral locations, reported by Forestier himself,
are frequent and have some peculiarities that distinguish them from
osteophytes of osteoarthritis, they are observed around joints rarely
affected by osteoarthritis: shoulder, elbow, metacarpophalangeal,
enthesophytes. They are bulky, different from osteophytes. They are
clearly implanted on the bone, away from the bone-cartilage junction,
site of the osteophyte, these enthesophytes are seen at a distance from a
joint, on other enthesic sites (heel spur, quadriceps tendon). We
conducted a study to determine the frequency of extraspinal forms of
DISH and their clinical presentations.
Methods: We conducted a prospective study in the Dept. of
Rheumatology, University Hospital of Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, from
February 2020 to February 2021 (12 months). The inclusion criteria were
all patients in whom the diagnosis of DISH was made according to the
definition criteria of Risnick. The exclusion criteria were the patients who
did not meet the definition criteria according to Risnick.
Results: 54 patients corresponding to the definition of Risnick were
included, with an average age of 67.21 y (54-87 y), a male predominance
of 61.11%. The most frequent antecedents were diabetes mellitus
(55.55%), followed by dyslipidemia (42.59%) and arterial hypertension
(29.82%). In our series, 6 patients (11.11%) of the patient presented in
addition to the spinal involvement an extraspinal osteoarticular
expression of DISH. The localizations were: the elbows (annular
ligaments and radial collateral), bilaterally, with irreducible painful
S215
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
limitations of the elbows; the left ankle (calcaneofubular ligament) in one
patient; the forefoot in the 2 patients (talonavicular ligaments), presenting
with mechanical pain when walking, with limitation of lateral
movements. The inflammatory assessment was negative in the patients.
These patients were put on analgesics and joint rehabilitation to reduce
joint pain and prevent limitations in terms of mobility and function.
Conclusion: The extraspinal forms of DISH are relatively frequent and,
depending on their location, lead to clinical manifestations that may affect
the functional prognosis of the joints. Their management consists in
treating pain while ensuring joint mobility.
Figure 1. Standard x-ray of the right elbow, frontal view: ossification of
the annular and radial collateral ligaments with preservation of the joint
spaces in the context of a DISH.
Figure 2. Standard x-ray of the left forefoot, frontal view showing an
ossification of the calcaneofubular ligament in the setting of DISH.
Figure 3. Standard X-ray of the right forefoot, lateral view showing an
ossification of the ligament with preservation of the joint space.
S216
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P358
CAVITIES IN BONE TISSUE, DIAGNOSTICS, TREATMENT
AND PROPHYLAXIS OF RECURRENT FRACTURES IN
CHILDREN
I. Prokofev1
1Penza State University, Penza, Russia
1Prokofiev I.A., 2Scherbakova J.G. 3Strukov V.I. 4Elistratov D.G.,
5Alekseeva N.U.
1Penza Institute of Postgraduate Medical Training, 2Dept. of Pediatrics,
Penza State University, 3MC “Healthy Children”, Penza, Russia
Objective: To study the role of detection of bone cavities (BC) in
trabecular bone with low BMD during diagnostics, treatment and
prevention of recurrent fractures (RF) in bones of forearm.
Methods: 67 children and adolescents aged 9-17 with RF of the forearm
bones and the presence of BC in them (boys 38, girls 29) were examined.
Laboratory work included serum total Ca, phosphorus, alkaline
phosphatase, 25(OH)D, PTH. BMD and BC in bone were assessed with
DXA. Children were divided into 2 groups. Group I - 32 patients received
vitamin complex containing D3 150 IU, vitamin B6 0.5 mg and drone
homogenate (HDBA). HDBA contains entomological hormones of bees
and organic vitamin D. Group II - 35 children received similar vitamin
complex without HDBA. Both groups received 3-month courses, 3 times
a year, with 1 month breaks.
Results: 43 children had BMD below - 2.0 SD, 24 had BMD between -
2.0 to +1.0 SD. The number and size of cavities on the DXA correlated
with the frequency of repeated fractures. Vitamin D deficiency was
observed in 43 children (64±10%), the content of 25(OH)D <20 ng/ml.
24 children (36±8%) had insufficient level of 25(OH)D (from 21-29
ng/ml). The level of PTH was high in 78±9% of children. After 1 y of
treatment we detected increase BMD in group I - 3.7% and 3.1% in group
II. Closure and reduction of bone cavities were 68±5% in group 1 vs. 43
±6% in group II (p<0.05); increase of 25(OH)D to 47±3.1 in group 1 and
up to 30±2.9 ng/ml (p<0.05) in group II. No side effects were observed.
We believe that better results in group I were achieved due to HDBA.
Conclusion: 1. Detection of BC in trabecular bone is important for
diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of RF. 2. Drone homogenate HDBA
can be safely and effectively used in children with recurrent factures of
forearm bones.
P359
A BUNDLED CARE PROTOCOL IMPROVES CLINICAL
OUTCOMES AND ACCESS TO CARE FOR PATIENTS WITH
SURGICALLY MANAGED HIP FRACTURES DESPITE
POORER COMORBIDITIES
K. C. Wong1, G. J. W. Cheok1, K. X. K. Tay1, M. A. Png2, N. N. Lo1, A.
K. Mitra1, T. S. Howe1, J. S. B. Koh1
1Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, 2Dept. of Diagnostic Radiology,
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore
Objective: Current literature has displayed the economic and clinical
benefits of standardised hip fracture programs.1 Our institution
implemented a hip fracture bundled care protocol in 2017, integrating
multidisciplinary teams to manage hip fracture patients requiring surgery.
Our study aims to analyze the impact of a bundled care protocol on
performance indicators and short-term outcomes of these patients.
Methods: “Post-Bundle” group included surgically managed hip fracture
patients admitted under a bundled care protocol. “Pre-Bundle” group
included patients admitted 2 y before implementation of this protocol.
Demographic data and key performance indicators such as time to
admission, time to surgery, inpatient mortality rates, length of stay and
discharge disposition were collected.
Results: There were 701 Pre-Bundle patients and 935 Post-Bundle
patients. Post-Bundle patients were older (78.0±8.5 vs. 79.6±8.6; mean
difference, -1.6; 95%CI -2.4 to -0.7; p<0.001), with a greater proportion
in American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classification III and IV
(III, 22.8 vs. 27.7%; IV, 0.7 vs. 1.0%; p=0.026). Post-Bundle patients had
shorter time to surgery (86.2±94.1 vs. 63.3±59.9; mean difference, 22.9;
95%CI 14.9-30.8; p<0.001), and a greater proportion (86.0 vs. 97.2%;
p<0.001) were admitted within 4 h and operated within 48 h (36.8 vs.
56.4%; p<0.001). There was no difference in mortality rates. Post-Bundle
patients had shorter length of stay (14.8±13.0 vs. 11.2±9.0; mean
difference, 3.6; 95%CI 2.5-4.7; p<0.001), with more discharged within
9 d (43.2 vs. 55.6%; p<0.001) and to a step-down care facility (47.8 vs.
68.0%; p<0.001).
Conclusion: Our study shows the clinical incentives following a bundled
care protocol in surgically managed hip fractures. Inpatient mortality rates
remain statistically similar in older hip fracture patients with higher ASA
scores. We conclude that a multidisciplinary approach to orthogeriatric
care leads to a more streamlined admission process, ensuring optimal
access to care for older and sicker patients, proper rehabilitation protocols
and resultant shorter hospital stays.
Reference: 1. Arshi A, et al. J Orthop Trauma 2019;33:e223.
P360
LOWER SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS IS ASSOCIATED WITH
HIGHER CHARLSON COMORBIDITY INDEX AND
INDEPENDENTLY PREDICTIVE OF POORER OUTCOMES
FOLLOWING HIP FRACTURE SURGERY
K. C. Wong1, L. M. H. Liow1, E. S. E. Tan1, K. X. K. Tay1, M. A. Png2,
N. N. Lo1, A. K. Mitra1, T. S. Howe1, J. S. B. Koh1
1Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, 2Dept. of Diagnostic Radiology,
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore
Objective: Lower socioeconomic status (SES) has been associated with
incidence of hip fractures1 and postoperative mortality.2 We aim to
examine the relationship between SES and Charlson comorbidity index
(CCI), length of hospitalization, time to surgery and 90-d readmission
rates in hip fracture patients.
Methods: Patients who underwent hip fracture surgery between 2013-
2016 were included. They were divided into Group PRIV (private)
consisting of patients with higher SES, and group SUB (subsidised)
consisting of patients with lower SES. We collected patient demographic
data and also analysed time to surgery, length of hospitalization and 90-d
readmission rates.
Results: There were 145 PRIV patients and 1146 SUB patients. SUB
patients had higher mean CCI (5.3 vs. 4.8, p=0.01), longer length of
hospitalization (19.2 vs. 14.9 d; p=0.001), increased delay in surgery
(96.3 vs. 70.1 h; p=0.005) and higher 90-d readmission rates (19.5 vs.
11.0%; p=0.013). Lower SES (OR, 2.5; 95%CI 4.72-40.65; p=0.01),
older age (OR, 3.20; 95%CI, 0.47-1.94; p=0.01), higher CCI (OR,
8.00; 95%CI 10.13-16.7; p<0.01) and higher American Society of
Anaesthesiologists score (OR, 2.94; 95%CI 6.13-30.64; p=0.03) was
predictive of time to surgery. Lower SES (OR, 3.88; 95%CI 1.43-6.32;
p=0.02) and higher CCI (OR, 1.21; 95%CI 0.76-1.66; p<0.001) was
predictive of length of hospitalization. Lower SES (OR, 1.79; 95%CI
1.03-3.10; p=0.04) and higher CCI (OR, 1.24; 95% CI 1.15-1.33;
p<0.001) was predictive of 90-d readmission rates.
Conclusion: Despite current literature establishing the relationship
between low SES and higher CCI, our study proves low SES to be an
independent predictor of time to surgery, length of stay and readmission
rate. Existing infrastructure should focus on home care delivery, health
education, and chronic disease management in order to reduce disparity
and healthcare burden, minimising the effect of socioeconomic factors on
patient outcomes.
References:
1.
Reyes C, et al. Bone 2015;73:127.
2.
Petrelli A, et al. J Health Qual 2018;40:209.
S217
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P361
EFFECTS OF PTH(1-84) ON CAMP LEVELS IN AN IN VITRO
MODEL OF HUMAN SATELLITE CELLS FROM SKELETAL
MUSCLE TISSUE
C. Romagnoli1, R. Zonefrati2, E. Lucattelli3, M. Innocenti3, T.
Iantomasi1, M. L. Brandi2
1Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, 2FIRMO Italian Foundation for the Research on Bone Diseases,
3Plastic & Reconstructive Microsurgery, Careggi University Hospital,
Florence, Italy
Objective: PTH is a single-chain peptide hormone consisting of 84
amino acids, secreted by the parathyroids, 4 endocrine glands located
on the back of the thyroid. Its main role is to maintain a constant
concentration of calcium (Ca2+) in the bloodstream. Since PTH increases
Ca2+ mobilization from bone, it is a key effector in bone metabolism,
balancing the process of bone regeneration and remodeling. However,
very few studies evaluate the effect of PTH on skeletal muscle, both
clinically and experimentally. Therefore, the aim of our work was to
investigate the in vitro effect of several PTH(1-84) concentrations in
human satellite cells (hSCs) in order to elucidate, at a cellular and
molecular levels, the mechanism of action of this hormone on skeletal
muscle tissue.
Methods: hSCs were isolated by enzymatic digestion and mechanical
dispersion of skeletal muscle tissue biopsies and a protocol for in vitro
myogenesis was established, as previously reported [1]. Cells were
exposed for 30’ to different concentrations of PTH(1-84), from 10-6 to
10-12 M, and cAMP levels were assayed by ELISA, in order to evaluate
the responsive concentrations of the hormone, in proliferating and
differentiated hSCs. Statistical analysis was performed by ANOVA
followed by Bonferroni’s test.
Results: The ELISA assay has shown no significant variation in cAMP
levels in hSCs in proliferation treated with several PTH(1-84)
concentrations. On the other hand, treatment in differentiated myotubes
with different PTH(1-84) concentrations has shown a significant increase
(+107%) in cAMP levels in cells treated with 10-7 M PTH(1-84) vs.
control group (*p<0.01).
Conclusion: This work has shown preliminary data on the in vitro effects
of PTH(1-84) on cAMP levels in proliferating and differentiated hSCs,
identifying the PTH(1-84) concentration 10-7 M as the responsive one in
myotubes. Studies are in progress in order to evaluate the effects of
PTH(1-84) on the hSCs proliferation and the myogenic processes.
Acknowledgment: This work was supported by FIRMO Foundation.
Reference: 1. Romagnoli C, et al. Calcif Tissue Int 2020; 107:18.
P362
RELATIONSHIP OF ΗAND GRIP STRENGTH, PHYSICAL
ACTIVITY AND ANTHROPOMETRIC CHARACTERISTICS
IN A SAMPLE OF GREEK PHYSIOTHERAPY STUDENTS
M. Tsekoura1, S. M. Bakirtzi1, S. L. Papadimitropoulou1, E. Billis1, K.
Fousekis1, C. Matzaroglou1, S. Xergia1, S. Lampropoulou1, E. Tsepis1
1Dept. of Physiotherapy, School of Health Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Patras, Aigio, Greece
Objective: To investigate the association of hand grip strength (HGS),
physical activity and anthropometric characteristics in physiotherapy
students living in Greece.
Methods: This cross-sectional study was done at Dept. of Physiotherapy,
University of Patras, Greece. A convenient sample of 276 physiotherapy
students of both sexes participated in this study. Body composition was
determined by bioelectrical impedance analysis (TANITA BC 601), calf,
midarm and waist circumferences were measured in centimeters with
non-elastic tape and HGS via a hand-held grip strength dynamometer
(Saehan, Seoul, Korea). Physical activity was assessed with the modified
Baecke Questionnaire for Habitual Physical Activity (mBQHPA).The
association between variables was calculated using Pearson r-
correlation coefficients. Effects of factors associated with HGS were
evaluated using regressions analysis. The study protocol was approved
by the ethics committee of Technological Education of Western Greece
(17-1-2018). All participants provided a written informed consent
approved by the ethics committee.
Results: 276 participants (21.5±4.11 y) were included in this study. Out
of 276 students, 154 (55.8%) were women, and 122 (44.2%) were men.
The mean of HGS was 37.15±11.2 kg. Men had significantly (p<0.001)
greater HGS than women (30.7±7.39 vs. 45.23±10.02). Statistically
significant strong correlation was detected between HGS and muscle
mass (r=0.73; p≤0.001), gender (r=0.6; p≤0.001); midarm (r-0.74;
p≤0.001) and calf circumference (r=0.69; p≤0.001). Results show that
fat mass were risk factor associated with HGS using regression analyses
in both genders. However physical activity was significant associated
factors only for women participants (ΟR 0.77, CI 0.17-1.38; p≤0.05).
Conclusion: This study identified that HGS is associated with muscle
mass in young men and women. These findings suggest that muscle mass
may be protective against lower HGS values for both genders. These
results may have significant impact in both prevention and treatment
techniques for people of different population and age groups. Future
studies in different age groups should investigate more factors that could
influence the strength of the grip.
P363
IN VITRO EFFECTS OF THE MYOKINE IRISIN ON HUMAN
ADIPOSE TISSUE-DERIVED MESENCHYMAL STEM CELLS
D U R I N G P R O L I F E R A T I O N A N D O S T E O G E N I C
DIFFERENTIATION
C. Romagnoli1, G. Palmini1, S. Donati1, R. Zonefrati2, T. Iantomasi1, M.
L. Brandi2
1Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, 2FIRMO Italian Foundation for the Research on Bone Diseases,
Florence, Italy
Objective: Irisin is a protein cleaved from fibronectin type III domain
containing protein 5 (FNDC5), first reported in 2012 by Bostrom et al. It
is a hormone-like molecule secreted from skeletal muscle in response to
exercise both in mice and humans and identified as an important effector
in the crosstalk between muscle and bone. Although a number of studies
reports that irisin increases osteoblast differentiation in vitro and cortical
bone mass in vivo, the models used are exclusively from rodent. Due to
the lack of reports on human models, the aim of our work was to
investigate the in vitro effects of this myokine on the proliferation and
the osteogenic differentiation processes in human adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells.
Methods: hADMSCs were obtained by enzymatic digestion and
mechanical dispersion, and cultured in growth medium. Cells were
exposed to 10 and 100 ng/ml irisin, for the entire experimental period
and refreshed every 2 d. The proliferation process was performed in
growth medium containing 2.5% FBS by cell counting at 24-48-72 h.
Statistical analysis was made by linearity test and parallelism test of the
linear regressions of the obtained growth curves. The differentiation
process was assayed quantifying the ALP activity and Ca2+ depositions
by fluorometric assays up to 35 d of osteogenic induction. Statistical
analysis was performed by ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s test.
Results: hADMSCs proliferation analysis has shown that 100 ng/ml
irisin significantly increases proliferation process (p<0.01) vs. control,
with a decrease of cell doubling time from 88 h to 63 h.
Osteodifferentiation with 10 and 100 ng/ml Irisin showed, after 14 d,
significant increases in ALP activity vs. control (+26%, p<0.01).
Moreover, both tested concentrations of Irisin anticipate the deposition
of mineralized matrix, resulting in significant increments in the
production Ca2+ nodules vs control after 35 d (+45%, p<0.01).
S218
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: The work has shown the in vitro effects of irisin on a human
model of ADMSCs. Preliminary results have highlighted this myokine as
an important effector on cell proliferation and during osteodifferentiation
of hADMSCs, supporting the hypothesis that Irisin could represent a new
potent anabolic treatment to gain bone mass.
Acknowledgment: This work is supported by FIRMO Foundation.
P364
THE EFFECT OF CHOLECALCIFEROL SUPPLEMENTATION
ON ARTERIAL STIFFNESS IN PATIENTS WITH
HYPOTHYROIDISM
I. Pankiv1
1Bukovinian State Medical University, Dept. of Clinical Immunology,
Allergology & Endocrinology, Chernivtsi, Ukraine
Objective: Recent epidemiological studies revealed a striking inverse
relationship between vitamin D levels, insulin resistance (IR), and
cardiovascular disease. However, few interventional studies have
evaluated the effect of vitamin D supplementation on cardiovascular risk,
such as IR and arterial stiffness in hypothyroidism. The aim of the study is
to investigate the role of vitamin D supplementation on cardiovascular
risk in patients with hypothyroidism, including metabolic parameters, IR,
and arterial stiffness.
Methods: We enrolled patients with hypothyroidism who were taking
levothyroxine medications. We excluded patients who were taking
vitamin D or calcium supplements. Participants were randomized into
the vitamin D group (cholecalciferol 4000 IU/d, n=40) or the control
group (only levothyroxine, n=35). We compared their IR (homeostasis
model of assessment [HOMA]-IR) and arterial stiffness (brachial-ankle
pulse wave velocity) before and after 26 weeks of intervention.
Results: The baseline characteristics of the two groups were similar. A
total of 75 participants completed the study protocol. At the end of the
study period, the 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] levels were
significantly higher in the vitamin D group than in the control group
(32.3±7.1 ng/ml vs. 17.2±6.4 ng/ml, p< 0.05). There were significant
differences in HOMA-IR and changes in arterial stiffness between the
groups.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that vitamin D supplementation might be
effective in terms of elevating 25(OH)D levels. We identified beneficial
effects on cardiovascular risk in hypothyroidism, including IR and arterial
stiffness.
P365
D R O N E B R O O D H O M O G E N A T E A B S O R B E D I N
POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS TREATMENT
S. J. G. Shcherbakova1, P. I. A. Prokofiev2, S. V. I. Strukov3, E. D. G.
Elistratov4, M. S. A. Musatova1
1Dept. of Pediatrics, Penza State University, 22Institute of Advanced
Medical Training, Branch of the Russian Medical Academy of
Continuing Professional Education, 3Institute of Advanced Medical
Training, Branch of the Russian Medical Academy of Continuing
Professional Education, 4MC “Healthy Children”, Penza, Russia
Objective: To study the effect of drone brood homogenate absorbed
(HDBA) on postmenopausal osteoporosis (OP).
Methods: 79 women with postmenopausal osteoporosis (OP) at the age
of 49-77 with androgen deficiency were examined. Diagnostics of OP
was conducted by means of clinical, laboratory, biochemical, and X-ray
methods. BMD was assessed by X-ray absorption. Hormonal status was
checked by enzyme immunoassay. Severity of OP was assessed
according to WHO classification. The study included only women with
menopause and presence of cavities in trabecular bones. Patients were
divided into 2 comparable groups. Group 1: 38 women received a
composition containing in 1 tablet: Ca citrate 250 mg, HDBA 50 mg,
vitamin D3 150 IU, vitamin B6 0.5 mg as follows: 2 tablets in the
morning and 2 tablets at night, 3 months courses, 3 times a year, with a
break of 1 month. Group 2: 41 women received a similar composition, but
without HDBA. BMD and the size of cavities were assessed before the
beginning of treatment and every 3 months during the treatment.
Results: Majority of patients demonstrated less complaints. More
pronounced clinical effect was noted in group1. 75% of patients
demonstrated a reduction of cavities size or closure of cavities. In group
2, cavity closure occurred 4 times rare. In group 1, concentration of total
testosterone increased from 1.1±0.4 nmol/l to 2.3±0.7 nmol/l (p<0.05) in
comparison with concentration before treatment. DHEA-S exceeded the
upper limit of the reference age value. In group 2, there were no
significant changes in the androgen level.
Conclusion: The combined usage of HDBA, Ca citrate, vitamins D3, B6
influences the OP therapy effectiveness. BMD increases, cavities
decrease in size or are being closed, hormonal status is being normalized.
The effect is due to unique entomological prohormones in HDBA and
other substrates promoting synthesis of own hormones in the body.
P366
APPLICATION OF AGE DEPENDENT INTERVENTION
THRESHOLDS TO OPTIMIZE DXA USAGE IN A RESOURCE
CONSTRAINED COUNTRY
S. Lekamwasam1, T. Abeygunasekara2, S. Subasinghe2, N. Rathnayake2,
G. Liyanage1
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Ruhuna, 2Faculty of Allied Health
Sciences, University of Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka
Objective: Age dependent intervention thresholds (ITs) are used for the
judicious use of DXA facility in resource poor settings and this study
evaluated such application in Sri Lanka.
Methods: Age dependent ITs were developed based on Sri Lankan
FRAX model adhering to the National Osteoporosis Guideline Group
(NOGG) guidelines published in the UK. Low ITs were calculated
for a woman of 25 kg/m2 BMI with no clinical risk factors for age
range of 45-80 y (5-y intervals). ITs were calculated in the same
manner considering that she had a previous fracture and high ITs
were set at 1.2 times higher. These values were applied to a group
of postmenopausal women referred to a DXA Unit in a tertiary care
center in the southern province of Sri Lanka, for the estimation of
BMD and fracture risk. Fracture risks (major osteoporotic fracture:
MOF) and hip fracture (HF) of these women were calculated using
Sri Lankan FRAX model considering clinical risk factors sans BMD
input. Women were categorized to three groups: high risk requiring
treatment, low risk not requiring treatment and intermediate risk
where estimation of BMD is required for further evaluation.
Results: Low ITs of MOF and HF ranged from 0.9-11% and 0.1-4.6%,
respectively. High ITs for MOF and HF ranged from 2.5-21.6% and 0.24-
8.4%, respectively. Mean (SD) age of the study sample (n=384) was 64.7
(8.5) y and all had been referred to DXA unit for clinical indications.
Based on above thresholds, 40% women were at high risk while 6% were
at the low risk categories. The proportion of women in the intermediate
category who require BMD for further assessment was 54%.
Conclusion: Application of age dependent ITs can potentially halve the
number of referrals for DXA evaluation and this would help streamlining
the DXA facility in the country.
P367
FRACTURE PREVALENCE IN MEXICAN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS: A 10-YEAR ANALYSIS DATA
P. Clark1, D. Montiel-Ojeda1, M. A. Guagnelli1, A. Rascón2, V. H. Borja3
S219
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Clinical Epidemiology Research Unit, Children's Hospital of Mexico
Federico Gomez-UNAM, 2Coordination of Epidemiology &
Informatics, Mexican Social Security Institute, 3Directorate of Medical
Benefits, Mexican Institute of Social Security, Mexico City, Mexico
Objective: Due to changes in recent years of lifestyle, and enforcement of
laws that protect children within motor vehicles, fracture prevalence
could be changing in children and adolescents. However, in Mexico, such
variation has not been explored. Hence, we obtained information regard-
ing fractures in children and adolescents from the population affiliated to
the Mexican Institute of Social Security (IMSS) to answer this question.
This study aimed to describe fracture rates in the children and adolescent
population of Mexico in 10 y (2007-2017) and to detect whether the
patterns of fractures have changed over time, between sexes, and among
different anatomical sites.
Methods: The information on fractures from children and adolescents 0-
19 years old was gathered from the Emergency Departments or hospital
wards at IMSS. The ICD-10 codes harvested were: S02, S12, S22, S32,
S42, S52, S62, S72, S82, S92, T02, T10, and T12. We harvest additional
information regarding sex and age. Rates of fractures stratified by sex per
10,000 were presented. Finally, we compared our results with a standard
population by direct method rate adjustment (1).
Results: In 10 y, 1,202,035 fractures were reported, 51.5% of fractures
were notified in adolescents between 10-19 years old. The most common
fracture site was the forearm (37%), followed by the shoulder (18%). Boys
had the highest frequency of fractures in both age groups (68.4%). We
observed a decrease in the prevalence rates of fractures in boys and girls
aged 0-9 y of: -1.9% (AAPC -1.9, 95%CI -2.6 to -1.2) and -1.4% (AAPC -
1.4, 95%CI -2.2 to -0.6), respectively. This same trend was observed in the
group of boys aged 10-19 y (AAPC -1.6, 95%CI -3 to -0.2). In girls aged
10-19 y, no significant changes were observed in fracture trends. When our
rates were compared with the ones reported in the population of Australian
children, all groups of Australians, boys, and girls, reported higher rates of
fractures than the Mexicans of the same age.
Conclusion: Rates of fractures in Mexican children/adolescents have not
shown considerable variations over the years. However, we notice in all
cases, except in the group of girls aged 10-19, a slight diminution of
fracture rates. One hypothesis to explain this difference could be associ-
ated with lifestyle changes.
Reference: 1. Pasco JA, et al. Calcif Tissue Int 2015;97:568.
P368
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN KNEE MRI MARKERS AND KNEE
SYMPTOMS OVER 7 YEARS IN YOUNG ADULTS
A. Singh1, A. Venn1, L. Blizzard1, F. Cicuttini2, G. Jones1, C. Ding1, B.
Antony1
1Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart,
2Dept. of Epidemiology & Preventive Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia
Objective: Knee MRI-based morphological markers (quantitative bio-
markers) and structural abnormalities (semiquantitative biomarkers) are
known to be associated with the progression of knee osteoarthritis (OA).
However, there is conflicting evidence on the association between knee
MRI-based morphological markers and knee symptoms (pain, stiffness,
and dysfunction). Besides, there is a lack of evidence on the clinical
significance of MRI markers in general population-based young adults.
Hence, our aim was to investigate the associations between MRI bio-
markers and knee symptoms in middle-aged adults followed over 7 y.
We aim to describe the associations of cartilage volume, cartilage thick-
ness, subchondral bone area, cartilage defects, and bone marrow lesions
(BML) with knee symptoms in young adults followed up over 6-9 y.
Methods: Knee symptoms were assessed using the WOMAC scale dur-
ing the Childhood Determinants of Adult Health (CDAH)-knee study at
baseline (year: 2008-10, age: 30-40 y) and 6-9 y follow-up (CDAH-3;
year: 2014–2019, age: 36-49 y). Knee MRI scans were obtained at base-
line and were assessed quantitatively for morphological markers such as
cartilage volume, cartilage thickness, subchondral bone area using semi-
automated segmentation (Chondrometrics, Germany). Cartilage defects
and BMLs were assessed using semi-quantitative scoring systems.
Univariable and multivariable (adjusted for age, sex, BMI) zero-inflated
Poisson (ZIP) regression models with random effects were used to de-
scribe the cross-sectional and longitudinal associations.
Results: The prevalence of knee pain at baseline (mean age (SD): 34
(2.7); female 49%) was 34%, and the prevalence increased to 50% over
6-9 years’ follow-up (mean age (SD): 43 (3.2)). There were significant
negative associations between medial femorotibial compartment (MFTC)
and patellar cartilage volume with WOMAC symptoms at baseline and
after seven years, and lateral femorotibial compartment (LFTC) and
WOMAC symptoms at baseline in the multivariable model. Similarly,
there was a significant negative association between MFTC cartilage
thickness and WOMAC symptoms assessed after seven years. The bone
area at patella was consistently negatively associated with WOMAC
symptoms at baseline and over seven years; no association was observed
for femorotibial bone area and WOMAC symptoms. Presence of any
cartilage defect or BML was associated with higher WOMAC symptoms
at baseline and after seven years.
Conclusion: In this middle-aged adult population, BML and cartilage
defects were positively associated with knee symptoms, whereas cartilage
volume and thickness at MFTC were negatively associated with knee
symptoms. These results suggest that the quantitative and semiquantita-
tive MR imaging biomarkers can be used as a marker of the clinical
progression of OA in a young adult population.
P369
VERTEBRAL FRACTURE ASSESSMENT USING DXA
EQUIPMENT HAS MODERATE INTEROBSERVER
AGREEMENT AND AFFECTS READER FATIGUE
J. M. Mostert1, P. Dibbets-Schneider1, S. R. Romeijn1, C. Götz2, M.
Difranco2, H. P. Dimai3, W. Grootjans1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Dept. of Radiology, Leiden,
The Netherlands, 2Imagebiopsy Lab, Vienna, Austria, 3Medical
University of Graz, Division of Endocrinology & Diabetology, Graz,
Austria
Objective: To investigate the time and effort needed to perform vertebral
morphometry, as well as interobserver agreement for identification of
vertebral fractures on vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) images, and
to evaluate the potential benefit for automated VFA.
Methods: 96 images were retrospectively selected and three
radiographers independently performed semi-automatic 6-point mor-
phometry in reading sessions of 6 images. Fractures were identified and
graded using the Genant classification. Time needed to annotate each
image was recorded and reader fatigue was assessed using a modified
Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ). Interobserver agreement was
assessed per-patient and per-vertebra for detecting fractures of all grades
(grade 1-3) and for grade 2 and 3 fractures using the kappa statistic.
Variability in measured vertebral height was evaluated using the
intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC).
Results: Per-patient agreement was 0.59 for grade 1-3 fracture detection,
and 0.65 for grade 2-3 only. Agreement for per-vertebra fracture classifi-
cation was 0.92. Vertebral height measurements showed a mean absolute
difference from the average across radiographers of 1.38 mm (95%CI:
1.36-1.41), with an ICC of 0.96. Time needed to annotate VFA images
ranged between 91-540 s, with a mean annotation time of 259 s. Mean
SSQ scores were significantly lower at the start of a reading session (1.29;
95%CI: 0.81-1.77) compared to the end of a session (3.25; 95%CI: 2.60-
3.90; p<0.001).
Conclusion: Although excellent ICC for vertebral height measurement
was achieved, agreement for detection of patients with vertebral fractures
S220
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
was only moderate. In addition, vertebral morphometry requires substan-
tial time investment and significantly affects reader fatigue. There is a
potential benefit for automation tools for detection of vertebral fractures
on VFA, both in improving interobserver agreement and in decreasing
reading time and burden on readers.
P370
THE LEVEL OF 25-HYDROXYVITAMIN D FOR OPTIMUM
PTH SUPPRESSION
O. Alsaed1, N. Abdulla1, A. Lutf1, F. Alam1, I. Abdelmomen1, S.
Alemadi1
1Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar
Objective: To determine 25-hydroxyvitamin D (Vit D) level at which
optimum PTH suppression can be achieved.
Methods: Serum levels of Vit D, corrected calcium (C.Ca), creatinine,
alkaline phosphatase (Alk-P), and PTH were extracted from Hamad
Medical Corporation laboratory database from June 2017 to June 2020
and analyzed retrospectively. Only simultaneously processed tests from
the same blood extraction were included. We excluded patients with
chronic kidney disease, primary parathyroid diseases, metastatic bone
malignancies, Vit D toxicosis and pregnancy by identifying patients with
creatinine >100 umol/L, C.Ca >2.5 and <2.15 mmol/L, Vit D >80 ng/ml,
and Alk-P >105 U/L. Mean difference of PTH level at Vit D ≥50 ng/ml
and at different Vit D level intervals (showed in Table) will be will be
calculated with corresponding p value and 95%CI.
Results: A total of 54,828 sets of tests were extracted from laboratory
data base. (29,428 sets) with serum creatinine >100, (52 sets) with Vit D
>80, (3665 sets) with Alk-P >105, (2125 sets) with C.Ca >2.5 and (421
sets) with C.Ca <2.15 were subsequently excluded. The remaining
19,137 sets of tests were included in the analysis. Mean age was 45.0 y
(Std 14.0), 56.1% were females. 80%, 17.9% and 2.9% were Arab, Asian,
and other ethnicities, respectively. There was no significant difference in
PTH suppression at Vit D intervals starting from (30-34.9), (35-39.9),
(40-44.9) and (45-49.9).
Conclusion: The optimum PTH suppression is observed at Vit D of 30
ng/ml and above. PTH level will not be suppressed significantly more
beyond Vit D level of 30 ng/ml.
Table. Mean difference of PTH level at Vit D ≥50 ng/ml and at different
Vit D level intervals (ANOVA analysis) with corresponding p value and
95%CI.
Vit D level
intervals
Mean
difference
P Value
(Ref. Vit D ≥50)
95%CI
<10
19.86
0.000
14.566
25.166
10 – 14.9
13.68
0.000
8.577
18.797
15 – 19.9
10.24
0.000
5.181
15.317
20 – 24.9
8.32
0.000
3.177
13.468
25 – 29.9
6.39
0.005
1.109
11.674
30 – 34.9
4.24
0.322
-1.335
9.817
35 – 39.9
4.69
0.263
-1.226
10.612
40 – 44.9
0.15
1.000
-6.732
6.429
45 – 49.9
0.85
1.000
-6.662
8.381
P371
WHICH BEST COMBINATION OF THE LUMBAR SPINE
VERTEBRAE FOR THE FRACTURE PREDICTIVE ABILITY
OF LUMBAR SPINE BMD AND TBS: THE OSTEOLAUS STUDY
E. Shevroja1, F. Mo Costabella1, E. Gonzalez Rodriguez1, O. Lamy1, D.
Hans1
1Lausanne University Hospital, Bone & Joint Dept., Center of Bone
diseases, Lausanne, Switzerland
Objective: BMD and TBS are two bone parameters assessed in the same
region (L1-L4) of lumbar spine DXA scans, which predict fracture risk
independently. In this study, we compare the fracture predictive ability of
BMD and TBS as calculated based on different adjacent vertebrae com-
binations within L1-L4. We hypothesized that the L4 vertebra would be
more affected by the erroneous positioning (e.g., lordosis) and their ex-
clusion from the TBS and BMD calculations would present a more opti-
mal estimation of TBS and BMD. Further, we aimed to see if some
combinations perform better at osteoporotic fractures prediction than
the traditional L1-L4 combination.
Methods: 1362 postmenopausal women (64.4±7.5 y old) from the
OsteoLaus cohort in Lausanne, Switzerland were included in this study.
LS DXA scans were performed using Discovery A System (Hologic).
Major osteoporotic fractures (MOF) occurring during the 5-y follow-up,
were assessed using Genant’s method (vertebral, VF) and questionnaires
(nonvertebral). Binary logistic regressions were used to obtain the risk
estimates for VFs or MOFs (shown here) per SD decrease in LS BMD or
TBS as calculated for L1, L2, L3, L4, L1L2, L2L3, L1-L3, L2-L4, L3L4
and L1-L4. The area under the receiver-operating-characteristic curve
(AUC) for each model.
Results: As shown in the Table, we see a tendency of the L4 TBS and
BMD to be more poorly associated with the risk of fragility fracture than
the other upper vertebrae. Further, one SD decrease in LS TBS and BMD
calculated from the combinations of upper lumbar vertebrae (L1, L2) was
more highly associated with the odds ratio for having a fracture than of
lower vertebrae (L3, L4). In the models of the LS TBS calculated based
on three or four vertebrae, the weakest association with fracture risk was
found with TBS L2-L4 and the strongest with TBS L1-L3, moderate with
TBS L1-L4.
Conclusion: The exclusion of L4 from LS TBS and BMD calculations
would improve their performance in fracture risk prediction; the inclusion
S221
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
of L1 is strongly suggested. The latter applies particularly for the coun-
tries using L2-L4 for LS BMD or TBS calculation as a standard in clinical
practice. L1-L3 is indicated as an optimal combination for the TBS or LS
BMD calculation. However, relying on less than four vertebrae for the
TBS and BMD calculations is uncertain given the vertebrae exclusion
rules. These findings need to be replicated in larger studies to give asser-
tive clinical recommendations.
Table.
SD decrease in TBS
SD decrease in BMD
MOF
MOF
OR (95%CI)
AUC (95%CI)
OR (95%CI)
AUC (95%CI)
L1
1.46 (1.15-1.87)
0.76 (0.72-0.81)
1.30 (1.11-1.52)
0.75 (0.71-0.80)
L2
1.37 (1.07-1.75)
0.76 (0.71-0.80)
1.20 (1.05-1.37)
0.75 (0.70-0.80)
L3
1.17 (0.92-1.49)
0.75 (0.70-0.80)
1.18 (1.05-1.33)
0.75 (0.70-0.79)
L4
1.12 (0.88-1.41)
0.74 (0.69-0.79)
1.15 (1.03-1.28)
0.75 (0.70-0.79)
L1L2
1.61 (1.18-2.18)
0.78 (0.73-0.83)
1.33 (1.10-1.60)
0.76 (0.70-0.81)
L2L3
1.34 (0.98-1.82)
0.77 (0.71-0.82)
1.31 (1.09-1.57)
0.75 (0.69-0.81)
L1-L3
1.46 (1.11-1.93)
0.76 (0.71-0.81)
1.24 (1.07-1.44)
0.75 (0.70-0.80)
L2-L4
1.27 (0.97-1.67)
0.75 (0.70-0.80)
1.17 (1.02-1.34)
0.75 (0.70-0.80)
L3L4
1.17 (0.87-1.57)
0.740 (0.684-0.797)
1.17 (1.00-1.37)
0.74 (0.69-0.80)
L1-L4
1.38 (1.05-1.82)
0.75 (0.71-0.80)
1.23 (1.07-1.41)
0.75 (0.70-0.80)
SD standard deviation, MOF major osteoporotic fracture, VF vertebral fracture, OR
odds ratio, AUC area under the curve, TBS models adjusted for age, LS BMD and
VF level, BMD models adjusted for age and VF level. Results were similar for VF
and non-VF MOF.
P372
INCIDENCE RATE OF OSTEOPOROTIC HIP FRACTURE IN
QATAR
O. Alsaed1, N. Abdulla1, A. Lutf1, F. Alam1, I. Abdelmomen1, S.
Alemadi1
1Hamad Medical Corp., Doha, Qatar
Objective: To estimate the annual incidence rate of osteoporotic hip
fracture in Qatar from January 2017 to December 2019.
Methods: Hamad Medical Corp. (HMC) is a governmental based tertiary
medical institute that provides medical care for the whole Qatar popula-
tion. International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) is used in HMC for
disease coding. Hip fractures were captured by identifying ICD-10 hip
fracture codes (S72.0, S72.1 and S72.2) from first of January 2017 till end
of December 2019. Records of these patients were reviewed retrospec-
tively to identify patient demographic data, mechanism of fracture and
pathological fractures. Patients who were nonresident in Qatar were ex-
cluded. The observed census of Qatar population in 2017 and the esti-
mated census of 2018 and 2019 were obtained from the book (Qatar
Population and Employment Projections 2017-2024 - a framework for
national planning). These censuses were used to calculate the age-gender
specific annual incidence rate of osteoporotic hip fracture for population
aged ≥40 y. World population 2010 was used to calculate the age stan-
dardized incidence rate per 100,000 for population aged ≥50 to enable
comparison with other country figure rates.
Results: During the study period, 458 hip fractures were identified. 75
(16.4%) hip fracture events were due to high energy trauma and 9 (2%)
were pathological hip fractures. The total number of osteoporotic hip
fractures was 374 (81.7%). Fractures were slightly more in males; 215
(57.5%). Mean age was 70.2 y (std±12.6). 141 (37.7%) osteoporotic hip
fractures were in Qatari citizens. In 2017, 2018 and 2019, the annual
standardized incidence rate of osteoporotic hip fracture for whole Qatar
population was 141.7, 140.8 and 162.7, for Qataris 154.2, 105.2 and
176.6, for non-Qataris 134.8, 183.9 and 160.4, respectively.
Conclusion: The standardized incidence rate of osteoporotic hip fracture
was quite close to the regional countries and lower than European and
north America countries.
Table. The annual standardized incidence rate of osteoporotic hip fracture
per 100,000 for population aged ≥50 y.
Year
2017
Males
Females
Total
2018
Males
Females
Total
2019
Males
Females
Total
Qataris
143.7
157.0
154.2
67.0
139.5
105.2
145.6
220.0
176.6
Non-Qataris 87.2
213.8
134.8
169.8
191.0
183.9
256.8
195.4
160.4
Qatar
popula-
tion
112.7
183.0
141.7
126.3
155.1
140.8
129.3
207.9
162.7
P373
VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY DURING PREGNANCY IS AN
ADDITIONAL FACTOR IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF
DIABETES
A. M. Borissova1, B. Trifonova1, L. Dakovaska1, E. Michaylova1, M.
Vukov1
1Bulgarian League for the Prevention of Osteoporosis, Sofia, Bulgaria
Objective: During pregnancy, physiologically develops progressively
increasing during this period of a woman's life insulin resistance and as
a result hyperinsulinemia. In diabetics, a beneficial effect of vitamin D on
glucose tolerance has been found. The aim of the present study was to
examine pregnant women with different levels of vitamin D and to eval-
uate its effect on the characteristics of their β-cell function.
Methods: We investigated 547 pregnant Bulgarian women, mean age 30
±5 y; with 79 hyperglycemia and 468 normoglycemia women. Two cat-
egories of vitamin D levels were adopted: <30 ng/ml (deficiency), n-401
and >30 ng/ml (sufficiency), n-146. The peripheral levels of 25(OH)D
were investigated using a standard electrochemiluminescence immuno-
assay in a central laboratory on the day of sampling.
Results: The whole group of pregnant women studied (n-547) had a
mean value of 25(OH)D 25.86±9.46 ng/ml, without significant difference
between groups with hyperglycemia and normoglycemia (25.69±8.67 vs.
25.89±57 ng/ml, NS). When comparing the two groups with 25(OH)D
>30 ng/ml (n-146) vs. 25(OH)D <30 ng/ml (n-401) with respect to plas-
ma glycemia during oGTT, a significant difference was found for
120 min - 5.58±1.45 vs. 6.04±1.59 mmol/l, P<0.001, but insignificant
for 0 min - 4.72±0.45 vs. 4.85±0.50 mmol/l, NS. These facts unequivo-
cally emphasize the direct link between sufficient levels of vitamin D and
the secretory capacity of β-cells. Correlation analysis showed a negative
significant correlation between 25(OH)D with the level of fasting plasma
glycemia - P<0.004 and on 120 min at oGTT - P<0.003.
Conclusion: We believe that vitamin D normalizes beta-cell function by
counteracting peripheral insulin resistance, thus overcoming basal hyper-
insulinemia. It further improves the functional capacity of β-cells, judg-
ing by its effect on plasma glycemia at the 120th minute of the oGTT
performed in pregnant women.
P374
DETERMINANTS OF MUSCLE DENSITY IN LATE
ADULTHOOD: FINDINGS FROM THE HERTFORDSHIRE
COHORT STUDY
F. Laskou1, L. D. Westbury1, N. Nicholas1, N. C. Harvey1, H. P. Patel1,
C. Cooper1, K. Ward1, E. M. Dennison1
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology unit Southampton, Southampton, UK
S222
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: In a recent meta-analysis, lower calf muscle density (indicat-
ing greater muscle adiposity and lower muscle quality) as assessed by
pQCT was associated with greater hip fracture risk, independent of
FRAX, falls and bone mineral density. To date, muscle density has been
little studied, and its determinants are unknown. In this study, we used a
well characterised cohort of older adults (Hertfordshire Cohort Study) to
identify lifestyle and anthropometric determinants of muscle density
some 11 y later.
Methods: At baseline, 197 men and 178 women, aged 59-70 y, were
recruited to a longitudinal study of musculoskeletal health. A lifestyle
questionnaire was administered to collect information on physical activ-
ity, smoking, alcohol consumption and dietary patterns; height and
weight were measured. pQCT of the radius and tibia was performed a
median of 11.5 (IQR 10.9, 12.3) y later, and muscle density was measured
at the 66% site using standard methodology. Baseline characteristics in
relation to muscle density at follow-up were examined separately using
linear regression with sex, baseline age and follow-up time included as
covariates in all models.
Results: Mean (SD) age at baseline was 64.7 (2.7) y; mean (SD)
muscle density values (mg/cm3) were as follows: forearm [men 79.9
(3.1), women 77.2 (3.2)], calf [men 80.7 (2.6), women 78.5 (2.6)].
Baseline correlates (p<0.05) of both lower forearm and calf muscle
density included female sex, lower weight, and lower BMI; SD
difference in calf muscle density for women compared to men,
and per SD lower weight and BMI were -0.84 [95%CI: -1.13, -
0.54]), -0.37 [-0.46, -0.27] and -0.31 [-0.40, -0.23] respectively.
Additional correlates of lower calf muscle density included older
age and shorter stature. Relationships between muscle density and
age were stronger at the calf (p<0.001) than the forearm (p=0.08).
Lifestyle measures were not associated with muscle density.
Conclusion: Female sex, older age, and lower adiposity, rather than life-
style, were associated with lower muscle density in older community-
dwelling adults. Age was more strongly associated with calf than forearm
muscle density. Further studies in larger cohorts are required.
P375
A STUDY OF ANTI-MULLERIAN HORMONE AND 25-
HYDROXYVITAMIN D LEVELS IN POSTMENOPAUSAL
WOMEN WITH LOW BONE MINERAL DENSITY
S. Das1, S. Verma2
1Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Delhi, 2SMSR, Noida, India
Objective: Osteoporosis is a bone disorder that increases a person's risk
of fracture due to low BMD. Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) is an ovar-
ian biomarker that plays an important role in folliculogenesis. AMH is
widely used clinically in reproductive medicine and is known to decrease
with age. Vitamin D is a steroid hormone that is mainly synthesized in the
skin after exposure to ultraviolet sunlight. It is debated whether vitamin D
has the capacity to influence the AMH level. This study evaluates the role
of decreased AMH and vitamin D linked to increased risks of osteoporo-
sis in postmenopausal women. This study aimed to evaluate the associa-
tion of AMH and 25-hydroxyvitamin D serum levels with BMD test
results in postmenopausal women.
Methodd: This study was conducted in a tertiary care hospital and in-
cluded 100 postmenopausal females, with ages ranging from 45-75 y.
These patients attended the Bone Clinic and were classified in the osteo-
porosis group and control group on the basis of BMD study. AMH and
vitamin D were measured by chemiluminescence assay (CLIA), and
BMD was measured by DXA for all the participants.
Results: Among the study participants, 56 % reported normal results of
BMD measurement (control group), and the incidence of osteoporosis
was 43% (osteoporosis group). AMH levels in the osteoporosis group
were 0.19±0.06 ng/mL and the control group was 0.44±0.05 ng/mL.
Vitamin D levels in the osteoporosis group was 37.65±3.26 ng/mL and
the control group was 9.84±2.48 ng/mL. A significant positive correlation
(r= 0.86, p<0.05 ) was observed between lower serum levels of AMH and
lower levels of vitamin D in the participants with decreased BMD results
(osteoporosis patients).
Conclusion: Lower vitamin D and AMH levels correlate significantly with
decreased BMD in postmenopausal females. These results suggest that
AMH is a potential biomarker of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women.
P376
THE VALUES OF BONE RESORPTION MARKER β-CTX FOR
E A R L Y D E T E C T I O N O F P O S T M E N O P A U S A L
OSTEOPOROSIS
A. Kocevska1, B. Kocevska2, S. Shubeska Stratrova2
1Special Hospital for Gynecology & Obstetrics Mother Theresa,
2University Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolic Disorders,
Medical Faculty, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia
Objective: 30-40% of healthy women develop postmenopausal osteopo-
rosis after the last menstruation due to a loss of estrogenic hormones.
Until recently, the measure of bone density was the most commonly used
method for osteoporosis detection. The disease was diagnosed very late,
often after voluminous osteoresorption. For timely intervention it is nec-
essary to detect the extent of the bone resorption what has been enabled
by usage of biochemical markers for assessment of osteoresorption and
osteoformation. This study aimed to determine the values of serum β-
CTx in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women.
Methods: A total of 350 women were included in this study. 45 of them
were in the control group of healthy women with regular menstrual
cycles.
The other 305 women were divided in 6 subgroups:
PeriM: 51 women in perimenopausal period
M1: 52 women with duration of postmenopause <2 y
M2: 52 women with duration of postmenopause 2-6 y
M3: 50 women with duration of postmenopause 6-10 y
M4: 52 women with duration of postmenopause > 10 y
Mt: 48 women with postmenopausal osteoporosis, treated with
antiresorptive therapy
β-CTx was determined in serum, with ECLIA method and measured in
ng/ml.
Results: In the control group all of the respondents had normal values of
beta CTx. In perimenopausal group (PeriM), the values of β-CTx were
above the upper limit (0.299 ng/ml) in 39.22% of women. In postmeno-
pausal groups, the values of β-CTx were above the upper limit for post-
menopausal women (0.556 ng/ml) in 39.22% of women in PeriM group;
in 38.46% of women in M1 group; in 51.92% of women in M2 group, in
61.54% of women in M3 group and in 59.62% of women in M4 group.
Patients treated with antiresorption therapy had normal values of serum
β-CTx.
Conclusion: β-Ctx derived from collagen type 1 is an important bio-
chemical marker that reflects the intensity of bone resorption, determines
the individual risk of bone loss and fractures, especially in postmenopaus-
al women. The percentage of women with increased markers for bone
resorption, and thus an increased risk of postmenopausal osteoporosis,
increases with age and duration of postmenopause.
P377
MOTOR CONTROL AND ERGONOMIC INTERVENTION
HOME BASED PROGRAMME DURING COVID-19
PANDEMIC: PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF THE MCHEELP
STUDY
M. Tsekoura1, S. Stasi2, J. Gliatis3, V. Sakellari4
1Dept. of Physiotherapy, School of Health Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Patras, Aigio, 2Dept. of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health
and Care Sciences, University of West Attica, Athens, 3Dept. of
Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Patras, Patras,
S223
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
4Dept. of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health and Care Sciences, University
of West Attica, Athens, Greece
Objective: To investigate the effects of a 12 week "Motor Control Home
Ergonomics Elderlies' Prevention of Falls" (McHeELP) on functionality
and fear of falling among Greek older adults.
Methods: 52 older adults (aged ≥65 y) who had experienced at least one
fall incident in the past 12 months were randomly assigned into two
groups. The first group (n=26) received motor control exercises com-
bined with ergonomic arrangements of the home environment and the
second group served as control (n=26). The McHeELP programme in-
cludes motor control exercises, divided into six domains: "Warm up,"
"Serial skills," "Cognitive skills," "Balance," "Sensory strategy," and
"Dynamic control." Regarding home modification, a booklet that
contained basic advice and tips on the modification for their home envi-
ronment was provided to all participants. Functional assessments includ-
ed 4-m, timed-up and go (TUG) and chair stand (CS) tests. Fear of falling
was assessed via the Falls Efficacy Scale (FES-I) questionnaire. All par-
ticipants were assessed at baseline and immediately post intervention
(week 12). The Ethics Committee of the University of Patras, Greece,
approved the study protocol.
Results: A total of 52 participants (20 men; 32 women) with a mean age
of 76.26±6.33 y participated in this study. Comparison between pre- and
post-intervention changes in functional measures and fear of falling
showed significant interaction between “intervention” and “time” in 4-
m test (p=0.014), TUG (p<0.005), CS test (p=0.011) and fear of falling
(p=0.041). Pairwise comparisons presented statistically significant differ-
ence between baseline and 3 months for all variables. No statistically
significant differences between time measurements were found for the
control group.
Conclusion: Results suggest that the McHeELP programme is feasible
and beneficial for older adults. This novel home-based exercise pro-
gramme is low cost and may help to increase functionality and decrease
falls in older adults. Further research is needed to understand the effects of
this targeted exercise program on older adults' motor control.
P378
SUSTAINING SHORT TERM OUTCOMES OF HIP FRACTURE
PATIENTS DURING THE COVID-19 GLOBAL PANDEMIC
UNDER A BUNDLED CARE PROTOCOL
G. Cheok1, K. C. Wong1, K. Tay1, M. A. Png2, D. Chua3, J. Koh1, T. S.
Howe1
1Singapore General Hospital, Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, 2Singapore
General Hospital, Dept. of Diagnostic Radiology, 3Changi General
Hospital, Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Singapore, Singapore
Objective: To investigate how the COVID-19 pandemic affects early
outcomes of an established hip fracture bundled care protocol within a
tertiary institute operating within its capacity.
Methods: We reviewed patients admitted for fragility hip fractures that
were surgically managed under a bundled care protocol between October
2019 to May 2020. “Pre-COVID” and “COVID” groups included pa-
tients admitted in a 4-month period before and after the nationwide lock-
down measures were implemented on 7 February 2021 respectively.
Demographic data, key performance indicators and outcome measures
were collected. Statistical analysis was performed and significance was
defined as p<0.05.
Results: Of the 245 patients studied, none of whom were COVID-19
positive, 143 were included in Pre-COVID arm and 101 patients in the
COVID arm. There was no significant difference in demographic data,
fracture pattern, type of surgery, time to admission and operation, dis-
charge disposition and mean postoperative length of stay. More patients
were discharged within 9 d postoperatively in the COVID group, and
fewer patients in the COVID group were reviewed by a physiotherapist
on postoperation day one. There was no significant difference in inpatient
mortality, 30-d readmission and revision surgery rates (Table 1).
Conclusion: No significant differences in key performance indicators
despite the various disruptions to hospital workflow during the COVID-
19 pandemic demonstrates that despite the effects of a pandemic on pub-
lic healthcare system, a robust bundled care protocol allows the continuity
of essential services whilst maintaining standards of care, sustaining short
term postoperative outcomes for hip fracture patients.
P379
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN TRYPTOPHAN METABOLITES
AND PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE AND FRAILTY IN OLDER
PERSONS
A. A. Al Saedi1, S. V. Vogrin2, G. G. Guillemin3, G. D. Duque1
1Australian Institute for Musculoskeletal Science, Geroscience &
Osteosarcopenia Research Program, University of Melbourne and
Western Health, St. Albans, Melbourne 2Dept. of Medicine-Western
Health, Melbourne Medical School, University of Melbourne, St.
Albans, Melbourne, 3Neuroinflammation Group, Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
Frailty is defined as a syndrome of physiological decline in late life,
characterized by marked vulnerability to adverse health outcomes. A
robust biomarker for frailty is still lacking. Tryptophan (TRP) metabolism
through the kynurenine pathway (KP) plays essential roles in aging, the
musculoskeletal system and physical performance. In this study, we
quantified eight KP metabolites, including kynurenine (KYN),
kynurenine acid (KYNA), quinolinic acid (QUIN), picolinic acid (PIC),
3-hydroxykynurenine (3-HK), 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid (3-HAA) and
anthranilic acid (AA) using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry in the serum of 85 par-
ticipants (median age 75; 65% female; 28 non-frail, 29 pre-frail, and 28
frail) at the Nepean Osteoporosis and Frailty (NOF) Study. We looked at
the association between TRP metabolites and physical performance, dis-
ability, frailty and percentage of circulating osteogenic precursor (COP)
cells, another potential biomarker of frailty. After adjusting for age and
sex, we found that frailty was associated with lower KYNA (OR 0.93
(0.88, 0.98), p=0.009) and higher QUIN (OR 1.11 (1.01, 1.21) for 500
nM increase in QUIN, p=0.029). Similarly, when using the Rockwood
index, there was a weak association with KYNA (r=-0.241, p=0.028) and
TRP (r=-0.220, p=0.045). Lower KYNA was also associated with sarco-
penia (OR 0.88 (0.78, 1.00), p=0.049). In addition, serum IL-6 was pos-
itively associated with KYN (r=0.324, p=0.003), 3-HK (r=0.293,
p=0.008) and QUIN (r=-0.293, p=0.008). Furthermore, COP cells were
associated with higher levels of serum TRP (r=0.296, p=0.008). No as-
sociation was found between TRP metabolites and grip strength or gait
speed. In conclusion, different TRP metabolites have various associations
with physical performance and frailty. Defining the underlying mecha-
nisms may permit the development and validation of new biomarkers and
S224
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
therapeutics for frailty and musculoskeletal conditions targeting specific
metabolites of the TRP catabolic pathway. As seen in this study, lower
KYNA is associated with Fried, Rockwood and sarcopenia.
P380
RURAL-URBAN DIFFERENCES IN FRACTURE LIAISON
SERVICES
C.-B. Chang1, R.-S. Yang2, W.-J. Huang3, D.-C. Chan4
1Dept. of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital
Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu City, 2Dept. of Orthopaedics, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 3Dept. of Geriatrics &
Gerontology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 4Superintendent
Office, National Taiwan University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu City,
Taiwan
Objective: Geographic variations may exist for fracture liaison service
(FLS) and medication management service (MMS) programs because of
different health resources and patients’ characteristics. We reported that
the medication uses patterns, 1-y medication adherence, and outcome for
FLS and MMS programs in the urban and rural areas.
Methods: The cohort included older adults with vertebral fractures under
antiosteoporosis medications treatment in the outpatient clinic. (N=237 in
Taipei City (urban) and N=141 in Chu-Tung Township (rural)). Care coor-
dinators followed similar protocols adapted from the 13 best practice frame-
work standards by the International Osteoporosis Foundation to provide
baseline assessments, and telephone follow-up every 4 months for one year.
The comparisons were made between rural and urban regions. Regression
analyses were performed to identify baseline correlates of selected outcomes.
Results: The mean age of the overall cohort was 76.1±9.6 y and 76.7% of
them were women. Patients in the rural region were less likely to adhere
to their medications for osteoporosis at one year (78.0 vs. 92.1%,
p<0.001). Regression analysis revealed that older age (odds ratio [OR]
1.098, p<0.05), lower serum albumin level (g/dL) (OR 0.091, p<0.05),
having heart disease (OR 5.667, p<0.05) were the factors associated with
mortality in one year in the urban region. Being older (OR 1.134, p<0.05),
higher serum Ca level (mmol/L) (OR 1.089, p<0.05), lower serum albu-
min level (g/dL) (OR 0.296, p<0.05), lower adherence to antiosteoporosis
medications (OR 0.974, p<0.05) were the factors associated with mortal-
ity in one year in the rural region.
Conclusion: Patients in the rural region had lower medication adherence
rates during 1-y follow-up than those in the urban region. The older age
and lower serum albumin level were the important factors associated with
mortality in both regions.
P381
EFFECT OF A SINGLE-SHOT INJECTION OF A HIGH-
DENSITY HYALURONIC ACID GEL IN PATIENTS WITH
SYMPTOMATIC PRIMARY KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS:
RESULTS OF NO-DOLOR STUDY
D. Khorsandi1, J. Monfort2, J. Combalia3, C. Emsellem3, Y. Gaslain3
1University of Barcelona, Procare Health, Barcelona, 2Hospital del Mar
de Barcelona, Barcelona, 3Procare Health, Castelldefels, Spain
Objective: The main aim of NO-DOLOR study is to evaluate the evolu-
tion of pain in patients with primary knee osteoarthritis (OA), after a
single injection of a high-density viscoelastic gel, which contains a high
concentration of hyaluronic acid (HA) (Pronolis® HD mono 2.5%:
120 mg HA in 4.8 ml)
Methods: Patients with symptomatic primary knee OA (according to
ACR criteria and with pain at inclusion equal or superior to 4 out of 10
measured by visual analog scale) were included in an observational, mul-
ticenter (70 specialized care centers), prospective one-cohort study. After
a single dose of Pronolis HD mono 2.5%, patients were followed for 6
months. Final results of the primary endpoint (3-months pain evolution
measured by domain “A” of the WOMAC scale) and secondary end-
points (6-months pain, stiffness, physical function, and pain on move-
ment evolution, measured by WOMAC-A, WOMAC-B, WOMAC-C
and 1st question of WOMAC-A respectively, safety and product tolera-
bility throughout the study were reported). The study was approved by
the Ethics Committee of the Hospital del Mar in Barcelona (CEIC-Parc de
Salut Mar).
Results: 189 patients were recruited. Data from 166 patients at 3 months
and 150 patients at 6 months were available for efficacy analyses. A statis-
tically significant reduction (p<0.0001) of the WOMAC-A score was ob-
served at 3-month visit vs. baseline visit: 4.25+3.36 vs. 9.03+3.49, with a
relative reduction of 42.5% (Figure 1). At 6 months, the pain level contin-
ued to decrease significantly throughout the study (Figure 1). Pain on
movement score was also significantly reduced at 6-month vs baseline:
0.80 vs. 1.69 (52.66% of improvement; p<0.0001). The degree of joint
stiffness and the functional capacity significantly improved at 6 months
vs. baseline: 1.69 vs. 3.69 in WOMAC B (54.20% of improvement;
p<0.0001) and 15.05 vs. 31.01 in WOMAC-C (51.60% of improvement;
p<0.0001), respectively. A significant percentage of patients improved
WOMAC indexes vs. baseline (Figure 2); 1.6% of patients reported local
adverse events (joint swelling) of mild intensity.
Conclusion: After 3 and 6 months of a single intra-articular injection of
Pronolis HD mono 2.5%, patients with symptomatic knee OA reported
significant pain improvement. The results were similar for pain on move-
ment, joint stiffness, and functional capacity. In addition, good tolerability
was observed.
Figure 1. Pain reduction along with the study.
Figure 2. Percentage of patients with improvement, no change, and dete-
rioration in WOMAC indexes at 3 and 6 months.
P382
PREVALENCE AND INCIDENCE OF VERTEBRAL
FRACTURES IN A RURAL GAMBIA, WEST AFRICA
N. Crabtree1, C. Parsons2, L. Jarjou3, R. Janha3, M. Ó Breasail4, A.
Zengin5, A. Prentice4, P. Ebeling5, C. Cooper6, K. Ward6
S225
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Birmingham Women’s and Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham,
UK, 2MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, UK, 3MRC Unit
The Gambia at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Banjul,
Gambia, 4MRC Nutrition and Bone Health Group, Cambridge, UK,
5Department of Medicine, School of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Australia, 6MRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, UK
Objective: Despite vertebral fractures (VF) being the commonest osteo-
porotic fracture, causing pain, disability, increased mortality, and being a
risk factor for future fracture, there are few to no data from resource-poor
settings where healthcare is limited. The aim of this study was to deter-
mine fracture prevalence and incidence in a population from rural
Gambia, West Africa, in a subcohort of the longitudinal Gambian Bone
Ageing study (GamBAS).
Methods: GamBAS is a prospective observational study in women and
men aged >40 y. Participants had baseline measurements in 2011-12 and
were followed-up 6-8 y later. DXA scans of the lateral and AP spine, and
proximal femur were obtained for VF assessment (LVA) and measure-
ment of BMD. The Genant semiquantitative method was used to define
VF. Prevalence and incidence were calculated; differences between frac-
ture and nonfracture groups compared using t-tests.
Results: 98 individuals (60 women[W]) had usable scans at both visits.
Median follow-up time was 7.2 y (range 6.6-8.6 y). Prevalence was
23.5% (n=23; 15W) at baseline with 46 total fractures (40 mild, 5 mod-
erate; 1 severe). There were 11 incident (7W) VF fractures during the 7 y
follow-up (715 person years); giving an incidence per 1000 person years
of 15.4%. Spine and hip BMD, T- and Z-scores were lower in the prev-
alent fracture vs. no fracture group; lumbar spine T-score [mean(SD)] was
-3.22(1.09) vs. -1.87(1.32); femoral neck -1.62(0.93) vs. -0.97(1.03). In
those with incident fracture, spine and total hip baseline BMD, T- and Z-
scores were lower (T-score lumbar spine -3.00(0.66) vs. -1.92(1.47); total
hip -2.03(1.25); -1.12(1.26)).
Conclusion: These are the first data to present VF prevalence and inci-
dence from West Africa. Population prevalence was similar to that from
the EVOS and SOF studies. There are few data in which to compare
incidence, though it is much lower than rest of the globe. As well as
prevalent fractures, significant amounts of degenerative change were
detected. Given the rising ageing population the burden of fracture in
these populations requires further and extended study, determining risk
factors and practical solutions within the limited resource healthcare
settings.
P383
BIFIDOBACTERIUM LONGUM ATTENUATES BONE LOSS
AND MAINTAINS BONE HEALTH BY MODULATING
BREGS-TREGS-TH17 CELL AXIS IN OVX MICE
L. Sapra1, A. Bhardwaj1, R. Srivastava1
1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Objective: Probiotics are known to be involved in management of vari-
ous inflammatory diseases including osteoporosis. Several studies along
with ours reported that probiotics showed its health promoting effects by
regulating Treg-Th17 immune cell balance in host. Furthermore, various
studies demonstrated that Tregs-Th17 immune cell balance can be further
regulated by regulatory B cells (Bregs) in host. But no study till date had
delineated the Bregs-Tregs-Th17 cell axis in case of osteoporosis i.e.,
“immunoporosis”. Moreover, no study investigated the immunomodula-
tory potential of Bifidobacterium longum (BL) in regulating bone health.
This study aims to examine the effect of probiotic BL on bone health via
modulation of host Bregs-Tregs-Th17 cell axis in Ovx mice.
Methods: 18 female C57BL/6 mice of 8-10 weeks were divided equally
in three groups as sham/control group, Ovx group and Ovx+BL group
(received 109 CFU/ml/d BL orally) for a period of 45 d. At the end of
experiment mice were sacrificed and tissues analysed for various param-
eters to access the role of BL administration on bone-health by using
several cutting edge technologies such as SEM, AFM, μCT, FACS and
ELISA/CBA.
Results: We observed that administration of BL attenuated bone loss in Ovx
mice. Both the cortical and trabecular bone content of Ovx+BL treated group
was significantly higher than Ovx group. Remarkably, the percentage of
osteoclastogenic Th17 (CD4+Rorγt+) cells at distinct immunological sites
such as BM and spleen were significantly reduced (p<0.01), whereas the
percentage of anti-osteoclastogenic regulatory T cells (Tregs); CD4+Foxp3+
and CD8+Foxp3+ were significantly enhanced (p<0.01) in BL treated group,
thus resulting in inhibition of bone loss. Interestingly, we for the first time
observed that the population of Bregs (CD19+CD1dhiCD5hiIL-10hi) was sig-
nificantly reduced in OVx mice with respect to sham group. Moreover, BL
administration significantly (p<0.01) enhanced population of these Bregs in
Ovx+BL group. The immunomodulatory role of BL was further supported
by serum cytokine data with a significant reduction in proinflammatory cy-
tokines (IL-6, IL-17 and TNFα) along with enhancement of anti-
inflammatory cytokines (IL-10, IFNγ) in BL treated group.
Conclusion: We propose for the first time that osteoprotective role of BL
on bone health is mediated via its effects on the Bregs-Treg-Th17 cell axis
which further regulates osteoclastogenesis. The present study thus high-
lights the potential of probiotic BL as a novel osteoprotective agent in the
treatment and management of bone related diseases including
osteoporosis.
Acknowledgement: This work was financially supported by projects:
DST-SERB (EMR/2016/007158), Govt. of India sanctioned to RKS.
LS thank UGC for research fellowship and AB thank DST SERB project
for research fellowship.
P384
DEPENDENCE OF THE ANTIDESTRUCTIVE EFFECT OF
RITUXIMAB ON THE COMBINATION WITH VARIOUS
DMARDS OR GLUCOCORTICOIDS IN PATIENTS WITH
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
A. Kudryavtseva1, G. Lukina2, E. Aronova1, G. Gridneva1, I. Dydykina1,
S. Glukhova1, A. Smirnov3
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, 22GBUZ Moscow
Clinical Scientific Center A.S. Loginova, 3V.A. Nasonova Research
Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate antidestructive effect of rituximab (RTM) in var-
ious combinations (RTM-mono, RTM+disease-modifying antirheumatic
drugs (DMARDs) and RTM+glucocorticoids (GK) in patients with rheu-
matoid arthritis in real clinical practice .
Methods: Clinical and radiological evaluation on 0 and 48 weeks 110
patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with rituximab: as monotherapy
RTM - group 1, RTM in combination with methotrexate (MTX) - group
2, RTM in combination with leflunomide (LEF) - group 3, and RTM +
other DMARDs - group 4. The same 110 patients were divided into 2
groups depending on the presence of concomitant GC therapy. Clinical
effect was scored by EULAR criteria, radiographic progression was
assessed using Sharp/van der Heijde (SvH) modified scoring method.
Results: When assessed after 48 weeks in the general group, remission
and a low degree of disease activity were noted in 22.36% of patients and
radiological progression was absent in 60.9% of patients. In the group of
RTM monotherapy, inhibition of destruction was noted in 76.92%, in the
RTM+MT group - in 54.29%, in the RTM+LEF group - 65.0%, and in
the group of other DMARDs - in 50% of patients (p>0.05). When
assessing the radiological progression it was shown that in the group of
patients who did not receive concomitant GC therapy, inhibition of bone
destruction according to the total Sharp score was noted in 54.55%, in the
group receiving concomitant GC therapy in 61.54% of patients, also
without statistically significant differences (p>0.05).
S226
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: This work has demonstrated the good therapeutic and radio-
logical effect of RTM in real clinical practice. There were no significant
differences in the degree of progression depending on the concomitant
therapy of DMARDs or GK. In the treatment of RTM, inhibition of artic-
ular destruction is possible against the background of clinical deterioration.
P385
BMD AND BONE TURNOVER MARKERS ALTERATIONS IN
WOMEN WITH ENDOMETRIOSIS DURING MENSTRUAL
CESSATION DUE TO GNRH THERAPY AND AFTER
MENSTRUAL RESTORATION
A. D. Anastasilakis1, S. Papachatzopoulos2, M. P. Yavropoulou3, A.
Gkiomisi2, P. Nikolakopoulos2, S. A. Polyzos4, I. Ballaouri5, K. Aliazis6,
T. Barbounis6, A. Papatheodorou6, S. Fermanoglou7, P. Makras8
1Dept. of Endocrinology, 424 General Military Hospital, Thessaloniki,
2Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynecology, 424 General Military Hospital,
Thessaloniki, 3Endocrinology Unit, 1st Dept. of Propaedeutic &
Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens; Department of Medical Research, 251 Hellenic
Air Force & VA General Hospital, Athens, 4First Laboratory of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, 5Analysis laboratories, Thessaloniki, 6Dept.
of Medical Research, 251 Hellenic Air Force & VA General Hospital,
Athens, 7Dept. of Bone Densitometry, AXEPA Hospital, Thessaloniki,
8Dept. of Medical Research, 251 Hellenic Air Force & VA General
Hospital; Dept. of Endocrinology & Diabetes, 251 Hellenic Air Force
& VA General Hospital, Athens, Greece
Objective: In this prospective, controlled, open label study among wom-
en with endometriosis we aimed to investigate the acute skeletal effects of
a short treatment period with a GnRH analog.
Methods. Premenopausal women (n=21, age 35.4±7.6 y) with surgically
verified endometriosis received once monthly goserelin s.c. for 6 months.
Following goserelin discontinuation patients were monitored for another
6 months after menstrual restoration. Age- and BMI-matched premeno-
pausal, healthy, untreated women served as controls (n=19, age 37.1±3.6
y). BMD at the lumbar spine (LS) and the femoral neck (FN), and bone
turnover markers (BTMs; P1NP and CTx) were measured before treat-
ment (baseline), at 6 months of treatment (6mo), and 6 months after
menstrual restoration (12mo).
Results: Baseline LS- and FN-BMD values did not differ between pa-
tients and controls (1.217±0.036 vs. 1.225±0.041, p=0.925 and 1.000
±0.038 vs. 0.986±0.036, p=0.807, respectively). In controls, LS- and
FN-BMD did not change during the study. Among patients both LS-
and FN-BMD decreased from baseline to 6mo (1.217±0.036 vs. 1.145
±0.035 g/cm2, p<0.001 and 1.000±0.038 vs. 0.975±0.039 g/cm2,
p=0.001, respectively), while LS-BMD increased again from 6 to 12mo
(1.145±0.035 vs. 1.193±0.038 g/cm2, p<0.001) but FN-BMD remained
stable (0.975±0.039 vs. 0.966±0.035 g/cm2, p=0.69); both LS- and FN-
BMD at 12mo remained below the baseline values (p=0.004 and
p=0.006, respectively). CTx and P1NP increased from baseline to 6mo
(349.4±47.3 vs. 629.1±65.5 pg/ml, p<0.001 and 40.4±4.4 vs. 81.2±7.7
ng/ml, p<0.001, respectively) and decreased from 6 to 12mo (629.1±65.5
vs. 324.6±46.7 pg/ml, p<0.001 and 81.2±7.7 vs. 60.6±9.7 ng/ml,
p=0.004, respectively), returning to baseline levels.
Conclusion: In premenopausal women treated with goserelin menstrual
cessation results in rapid increases of BTMs and decreases of BMD
values. These changes are partially reversed 6 months after menstrual
restoration.
P386
LOW BACK PAIN IN MEN AND WOMEN WITHOUT
SPONDYLOARTHRITIS
O. Iaremenko1, K. Mazanko1, D. Fedkov1, D. Dobrianskyi1, O.
Smirnova1, V. Zhukova1
1Bogomolets National Medical University, Dept. of Internal Medicine #3,
Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: To determine the lower back pain (LBP) and inflammatory
back pain (IBP) prevalence, characteristics, gender differences among
patients (pts) without spondyloarthritis (SpA).
Methods: 1799 pts, including 736 men and 1063 women, with general
therapeutic, urological, and neurological pathologies completed the ques-
tionnaire developed in the Internal Medicine Department #3 of
Bogomolets National Medical University. The presence or history of
LBP, its cause, localization, onset, signs of IBP determined by Calin
criteria [1] were analyzed depending on sex.
Results: 1567 of 1799 pts (84.9% of men and 87.6% of women) with
mean age 41.4±17.1 reported the presence or history of LBP. 95.4%
(1717 pts, 696 men and 1021 women, mean age 41.4±17.1) were patients
without SpA. In this group, 50.4% of men vs. 44.1% of women had
decreased pain after exercise (p<0.05). Also, in men, LBP was preceded
by trauma 1.5 times more often than women (p<0.05). The age distribu-
tion of the onset of LBP had no significant difference between gender
groups. Gradual onset of pain characterized both sexes. 19.3% of men
and 18.3% of women had morning stiffness for >30 min (p>0.05). Four
of the five signs of IBP had 16.5% (17.8% of men and 15.7% of women).
The most common combination (7.7%) of IBP signs was: the onset of
back pain up to 40 y, the gradual onset of back pain, morning stiffness,
relief of back pain during exercise.
Conclusion: The prevalence of LBP in patients without SpA is high for
both sexes. In men, in comparison with women, LBP is more often related
to previous trauma and decreases after physical activity. The prevalence
of IBP is high among the patients without SpA, which indicates the need
for additional procedures to exclude SpA in this pts group and may
indicate the low specificity of the Calin criteria.
Reference: 1. Akgul O, Ozgocmen S. World J Orthop 2011;2:107.
P387
SCORING PROPOSAL FOR THE UNDERLYING DIAGNOSIS
OF SYSTEMIC MASTOCYTOSIS IN PATIENTS WITH
UNEXPLAINED SEVERE OSTEOPOROSIS
G. Orsolini1, I. Tanasi2, L. Crosera2, A. Bernardelli2, M. Bonifacio2, P.
Bonadonna3, R. Zanotti2, A. Fassio1, G. Adami1, M. Krampera2, M.
Rossini1
1AOUI Verona - Rheumatology Unit, 2AOUI Verona - Hematology Unit,
3AOUI Verona - Allergology Unit, Verona, Italy
Objective: Fragility fracture and osteoporosis have a high prevalence and
clinical burden in systemic mastocytosis (SM). As distinct from patients
with other mediator-related symptoms, a predictive score to diagnose SM
in these patients is lacking. moreover, normal serum basal tryptase (sbT)
levels do not exclude SM diagnosis, whereas high sbT levels might be
due to familial hypertryptasemia. The aims describing the clinical features
of a large series of adult patients referred for unexplained osteoporosis
and suspected SM. Also we wanted to identify criteria useful to predict
SM diagnosis and strengthen the indication for bone marrow biopsy
(BM).
Methods: We included 110 ten patients with unexplained osteoporosis
who underwent BM evaluation. The design is retrospectical. Diagnosis of
SM was based on the 2016 WHO criteria. We excluded patients with
osteoporosis explained otherwise.
Results: With BM, 48 patients (43.6%) received the diagnosis of SM, of
whom 44 (91.7%) had bone marrow mastocytosis and 4 (8.3%) had
indolent SM, with previously unrecognized skin lesions. Other
mediator-related symptoms were reported in 31 patients (64.6%). 62 pa-
tients (56.4%) were negative for mastocytosis and used as a control
group. SM patients were younger than controls (median age 55 vs. 63
y, respectively; p=0.005), had higher median sbT level (31.7 vs. 15.8 ng/
mL, p<0.001) and presented more frequently fragility fractures (93.7 vs.
S227
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
74%, respectively; p=0.009). No significant differences according to gen-
der and mediator-related symptoms were found between the two groups.
Based on multivariate analysis, a model to predict the diagnosis of SM
before BM study was built, including age <50 y (p≤0.001) or not >70 y
(p=0.010), sbT level ≥19.4 ng/mL (p<0.001) and the presence of fragility
fractures (p=0.02) as independent predictive factors. Patients with a score
<2 had a lower probability to have mastocytosis (p<0.001).
Conclusion: The diagnosis of SM should be excluded in cases of unex-
plained osteoporosis. Since BM evaluation counts a large number of
negative cases, this score could avoid unuseful BM studies. In cases with
a score <2, searching for the D816V KIT mutation on peripheral blood
and testing for familial hypertryptasemia could lower the risk of losing
cases of mastocytosis.
P388
INFLUENCE OF VITAMIN D AND IODINE DEFICIENCY ON
THYROID FUNCTION AND AUTOIMMUNITY MARKERS IN
HYPOTHYROIDISM
V. Pankiv1
1Ukrainian Research Centre of Endocrine Surgery, Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: Data on the effects of vitamin D and iodine supplementa-
tion on thyroid function in hypothyroid patients are scarce. There are
controversies in this regard. The aim of this double-blind randomized
placebo-controlled clinical trial was to investigate the effect of vita-
min D and iodine deficiency treatment on thyroid function and auto-
immunity marker (thyroid peroxidase antibody [TPO-Ab]) in patients
with hypothyroidism.
Methods: 76 patients with hypothyroidism, iodine and vitamin D defi-
ciency (25-hydroxyvitamin D level ≤20 ng/ml) were randomly allocated
into two groups to receive vitamin D (30000 IU/week, orally) or placebo
for 12 weeks, as vitamin D-treated (n=50) and control (n=26) groups,
respectively. Serum TPO-Ab, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH),
PTH, calcium, and urinary iodine concentrations were compared before
and after trial between and within groups. The data were presented as
mean (standard error [SE]) and analyzed by appropriate tests.
Results: Mean of vitamin D was increased in vitamin D-treated group
(43.2 [1.9] vs. 12.9 [0.8] ng/ml, P=0.02). Mean of TPO-Ab significantly
changed in both groups (837 [104.89] vs. 411.35 [92.41] IU/ml, P=0.04 in
vitamin D-treated and did not significantly change 770.08 [106.3] vs.
827.14 [97.2] IU/ml in placebo-treated group, P=0.25). Mean of TSH
was not changed in both groups after trial, P=0.3 and P=0.35 for vitamin
D-treated and control groups, respectively.
Conclusion: Vitamin D treatment in iodine and vitamin D deficient pa-
tients with hypothyroidism has significant effect on thyroid function and
autoimmunity.
P389
SELF-INJECTION OF DENOSUMAB IN CLINICAL PRACTICE
IN THE FRENCH PILOTE STUDY
K. Briot1, P. Samama2, G. Desamericq2, J. O'Kelly3
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Hopital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux
de Paris, Paris, France, 2Amgen SAS, Boulogne-Billancourt, France,
3Amgen Ltd, Uxbridge, UK
Objective: Describe characteristics of patients who self-inject
denosumab and patterns of self-injection in France.
Methods: PILOTE was a prospective observational study that evaluated
persistence to denosumab over 24 months in France in postmenopausal
women. Clinical information obtained through routine practice was re-
corded onto an eCRF, including the individual who injected subcutane-
ous denosumab (physician, nurse, patient, other). We conducted an ad
hoc analysis of the patients in the study who self-injected denosumab.
Results: In total, 478 patients were enrolled between June 2105 and
February 2016. 27 patients self-injected denosumab at least once, with
these patients distributed across multiple sites. Those who self-injected
appeared slightly younger with longer duration of osteoporosis, and a
higher proportion had a prior fracture and previous glucocorticoid and
teriparatide treatment than the overall population (Table). Self-injected
patients were also more likely to be living at home with family, have a
University education, and be seen by a rheumatologist than a GP. Twelve
patients self-injected from the beginning of the study, 15 self-injected
after receiving injection from an HCP and 8 switched back to HCP injec-
tions after self-injection. Eleven of the 12 patients who self-injected from
the beginning were persistent at 24 months. Six ADRs occurred in three
self-injecting patients: one vertebral fracture, bone pain, muscle fatigue,
myalgia, asthenia, pyelonephritis.
Conclusion: Although numbers were small, self- administration of
denosumab appeared feasible for women with postmenopausal osteopo-
rosis and may be a valuable option, particularly in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic when office visits are restricted.
Acknowledgement: This study was funded by Amgen.
Table. Characteristics of patients who self-administered denosumab and
overall.
Patients who
self-injected
at least once
N=27
All patients
N=478
Age (Mean±SD), years
69.81±10.29
72.48±9.73
Number of comorbidities
– n (%)
<3
19 (70.4%)
349 (73.0%)
≥3
8 (29.6%)
129 (27.0%)
Prior treatment
with osteoporosis
therapies – n (%)
25 (92.6%)
434 (90.8%)
BP
22 (81.5%)
416 (87.0%)
Teriparatide
7 (25.9%)
44 (9.2%)
Glucocorticoids >3 months
5 mg or more – n (%)
4 (14.8%)
42 (8.8%)
History of osteoporosis
related fracture – n (%)
20 (74.1%)
291 (60.9%)
Parent history of hip
fracture – n (%)
2 (8.7%)
61 (15.5%)
Rheumatoid arthritis
1 (3.7%)
19 (4.0%)
Visual impairment
5 (18.5%)
100 (20.9%)
Year since PMO
diagnosis (Mean±SD)
8.74±6.36
7.82±6.00
Diabetes type 1
0 (0.0%)
3 (0.6%)
Diabetes type 2
0 (0.0%)
23 (4.8%)
Patient's living situation
At home with spouse/family
20 (74.1%)
267 (55.9%)
At home with care/support
0 (0.0%)
38 (7.9%)
At home alone
7 (25.9%)
164 (34.3%)
Nursing home
0 (0.0%)
4 (0.8%)
Unknown
0 (0.0%)
5 (1.0%)
Formal education of the patient
No formal education
0 (0.0%)
9 (1.9%)
Elementary education
3 (11.1%)
186 (38.9%)
Secondary education
12 (44.4%)
185 (38.7%)
University
10 (37.0%)
64 (13.4%)
Unknown
2 (7.4%)
34 (7.1%)
Physician primary specialty
S228
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Rheumatologist
24 (88.9%)
326 (68.2%)
General practitioner
3 (11.1%)
152 (31.8%)
Physician type of practice
Private practice
9 (33.3%)
247 (51.7%)
Hospital practice
7 (25.9%)
118 (24.7%)
Mixed practice
11 (40.7%)
113 (23.6%)
P390
EVALUATION OF TOPICAL THERAPY OF PATIENTS WITH
OSTEOARTHRITIS OF SMALL JOINTS OF THE HANDS
V. Tsurko1, M. Gromova2
1Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov
University), 2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University
(Pirogov Medical University), Moscow, Russia
Objective: More and more attention is paid to the problem of osteoar-
thritis (OA) of small joints of the hands. To date, there is evidence of the
efficacy of diclofenac diethylaminе 2% in the treatment of OA of large
joints, but there is no data on it effect on OA of small joints of the hands.
This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of using the
diclofenac diethylaminе 2% for 14 d in patients with osteoarthritis of
small joints of the hands.
Methods: 62 patients of both sexes with hands OA were included in the
study, 31 of whom (main group) used diclofenac diethylaminе 2% topi-
cally, and the remaining 31 (comparison group) – diclofenac diethyl-
amine 2% + oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The effectiveness
of therapy was assessed by using a visual analogue scale in dynamics:
joint pain and stiffness at rest, during movement and palpation, by func-
tional indices AUSCAN, FIHOA, by assessment of the effect of therapy
by the doctor and the patient on a weekly basis.
Results: Joint pain decreased after 2 weeks of therapy in all patients
during treatment with diclofenac diethylamine 2% in both groups.
Significant reduction in stiffness and improvement in hand joint function
was achieved after 7 days and lasted until the end of treatment. By the end
of treatment, 100% of patients assessed their condition as improvement.
Conclusion: Diclofenac diethylamine 2% demonstrates efficacy in pa-
tients with OA of the hand joints (reduced pain, stiffness and improved
joint function) both in monotherapy and as part of complex therapy, while
being well tolerated.
P391
RISK OF REVISION AFTER TOTAL HIP ARTHROPLASTY:
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF PHYSICALLY DEMANDING WORK?
E. Zaballa1, G. Ntani1, E. C. Harris1, A. Lübbeke-Wolff2, C. Cooper3, K.
Walker-Bone1
1MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Health and Work,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK, 2Division of
Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Geneva University Hospitals,
Geneva, Switzerland, 3MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK
Objective: To investigate the role of occupational exposure post total hip
arthroplasty (THA) in increasing the risk of future revision.
Methods: People in the Geneva Hip Arthroplasty registry aged 18-64 y
who underwent an elective THA between March 1996-December 2012
were eligible for this study. A postal questionnaire was sent to collect
postoperative: leisure time physical activities and physically demanding
work exposures. Preoperative health status and relevant surgical factors
were extracted from the GAR records. People were excluded if they had
undergone revision surgery for postoperative complications or infection.
Proportional Cox regression hazard models were fitted to calculate crude
and adjusted hazard ratios (HR) for the risk of revision surgery and their
95% confidence intervals (CI).
Results: Amongst 557 respondents (57% response rate) who underwent
THA at a median of 58 years (IQR: 51-61), 329 worked post-THA. Of
these, 241 provided information on job title, physical occupational activ-
ities and duration of work. There were 17 revision THAs amongst those
who worked post-THA. We found no increased risk of revision THA
amongst people who reported: standing >4 h/d; walking >2 miles/d; car-
rying/lifting weights; climbing ladders; or climbing >30 flights of stairs/d.
However, after adjusting for age at THA, sex, BMI and time to reach best
function, people who knelt/squatted at work post-THA showed a HR of
2.79 (95%CI 1.00-7.81) for risk of revision compared with those who did
not.
Conclusion: There were few revision procedures even despite the long
period of follow-up, thus diminishing our statistical power. Although no
occupational activity reached significance, the estimated risk of revision
surgery after kneeling/squatting is doubled. This result requires replica-
tion but may be of importance in advising THA patients preoperatively.
P392
ASSESSMENT OF THE RESPONSE PROFILE TO
HYALURONIC ACID PLUS SORBITOL INJECTION IN
PATIENTS WITH KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS: POST HOC
ANALYSIS OF A 6-MONTH RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED
TRIAL
O. Bruyère1, G. Honvo1, E. Vidovic2, B. Cortet3
1Division of Public Health, Epidemiology and Health Economics, Liège,
Belgium, 2Aptissen SA, Medical Department, Plan-les-Ouates,
Switzerland, 3University Hospital of Lille, Department of
Rheumatology and UR4490, Lille, France
Objective: Independent risk factors for osteoarthritis (OA) progression
have been identified but little is known whether they might also alter the
response to treatments. In a previous randomized trial, the noninferiority
of two hyaluronic acid injections (Synolis VA vs. Synvisc-One) was
assessed in patients with knee OA, with an OMREACT-OARSI response
rate of 79% for Synolis VA. The objective of the present study was to
assess whether a responder profile could be established for this treatment
modality.
Methods: Post hoc analysis using the Synolis VA arm of a 6-month
prospective, multicentre, comparative, randomized, double-blinded
trial. At baseline and during the study, pain and function were assessed
using the WOMAC questionnaire. Patient response to treatment at after 6
months was also assessed according to the OMERACT/OARSI criteria.
Data were collected, at baseline, on variables that could potentially impact
the response to treatment (e.g., age, sex, BMI, Kellgren-Lawrence grade,
duration of OA since diagnosis, and baseline WOMAC scores).
Results: 91 subjects with complete data were included in the analyses.
The probability of improving the WOMAC Pain with Synolis VA was
independent of any baseline clinical data. However, the chance to im-
prove the WOMAC Function was significantly associated with its base-
line level, even after adjustment for potential confounding variables
(p=0.046). In addition, the WOMAC total score at baseline was indepen-
dently associated with treatment response using the OMERACT/OARSI
criteria (OR: 1.05; 95%CI: 1.02-1.09) in multivariate logistic regression
analysis adjusted for age, sex, and baseline BMI. Only baseline WOMAC
pain (p=0.005) and WOMAC function (p=0.01) specific subscales play a
significant role as predictor of response to treatment according to the
OMRERACT/OARSI criteria, while baseline WOMAC stiffness had
no significant effect (p=0.08).
Conclusion: In addition to the high absolute response rate to Synolis VA,
the probability of success is even increased if administered in patients
with more intense pain and more limited physical function at
baseline. Further research with other potential confounding clinical vari-
ables is warranted in order to better applicate the concept of personalized
medicine.
S229
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P393
DISSECTING THE MOLECULAR MECHANISMS BEHIND
THE BIOSYNTHESIS AND TRAFFICKING OF THE
CALCIUM-SENSING RECEPTOR
L. Iamartino1, M. L. Brandi2
1Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, 2Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences,
University of Florence; FIRMO Foundation, Florence, Italy
The calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) is a GPCR receptor that controls
calcium level in the blood by regulating the synthesis and the secretion of
PTH. Defects on CaSR activity, due to its downregulation or to inherited
mutations, lead to hyperparathyroidism disorders and to calcium/PTH
imbalance. It appears, despite some contradictory reports, that pharmaco-
logical stimulation of the CaSR via its specific FDA-approved modulator
cinacalcet increases CaSR expression and its membrane recruitment.
However, the mechanisms behind CaSR biosynthesis and its anterograde
trafficking are still unclear and require further proofs.
The aim of the present study is to dissect how CaSR activation triggers its
own biosynthesis and whether this can be further enhanced by pharma-
cological stimulation.
Using either bovine parathyroid and human adenoma parathyroid cells,
either HEK cells stably transfected with a CaSR-expressing vector
(HEK_CaSR), we are investigating the changes of CaSR expression
and signaling via RT-qPCR, western blot, IP-one and intracellular calci-
um mobilization assays. We are further double transfecting the parathy-
roid cell line (PTHC1), generated in our laboratory, with vectors express-
ing CFP-tag CaSR and DKK-tag PTH. With this model we will be able to
i) monitor CaSR biosynthesis and membrane trafficking through live cell
imaging; ii) CaSR activity by assessing PTH production and secretion; iii)
assess the interaction of the CaSR with down-stream signaling factors via
immunoprecipitation and further unveil novel interacting proteins
through mass spectrometry and FRET assays.
Our preliminary data show that in HEK_CaSR cells, 24 h stimulation
with 1μM of cinacalcet increases CaSR mRNA and protein levels by 2-
fold compared to untreated control, while inhibiting the CaSR with 1μM
of NPS 2143 reduces CaSR expression.
Based on our early results, we suggest the existence of a positive feedback
mechanism that promotes CaSR biosynthesis upon its stimulation.
Commonly GPCRs internalize once activated causing desensitization,
while the CaSR seems to guarantee a sustained signaling upon continuous
stimulus. Exploiting this mechanism will allow us to improve current
pharmacological treatments for hyperparathyroidism disorders.
P394
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE TOULOUSE SAINT LOUIS
UNIVERSITY MINI FALLS ASSESSMENT TOOL TO
PREDICT INCIDENT FALLS AMONG OLDER ADULTS
R E S I D I N G I N N U R S I N G H O M E S : A 6 - M O N T H
PROSPECTIVE STUDY
M. Locquet1, F. Bonnard1, C. Beaudart1, C. Coendo2, S. Gillain3, J.-Y.
Reginster1, O. Bruyère1
1University of Liège, Division of Public Health, Epidemiology and
Health Economics, 2University Hospital of Liège, Physical
Rehabilitation Medicine and Sports Traumatology, 3University Hospital
of Liège, Geriatrics Dept., Liège, Belgium
Objectives: Toulouse Saint Louis University Mini Falls Assessment
(TSLUMFA) tool has been designed to predict falls. It was initially val-
idated in a geriatric clinic in 2018. The primary objective was to evaluate
the predictive capacity of the TSLUMFA for incident falls in older adults
residing in nursing homes. The secondary objective was to determine the
TSLUMFA optimal cut-off value identifying those older adults with a
high-risk of falling.
Methods: Settings: A longitudinal study was carried out over a period of
6 months. Participants: 93 older adults residing in nursing homes were
evaluated for the present study. Measurements: The TSLUMFA (made
up of 7 criteria) was administered at baseline, and incident falls were
recorded based on a registry of falls. Comparisons of TSLUMFA scores
between fallers and non-fallers were performed using the U Mann-
Whitney test or χ². Correlation between the total TSLUMFA score (/30
points) and incident fall(s) was explored using the Cox proportional haz-
ard model. ROC analysis enabled an optimal cutoff value to be estab-
lished to identify those adults at the highest risk of falling.
Results: In the study, 93 older adults (61.3% women) with a median age
of 80 (69-87) y were included. The median total TSLUMFA score was 21
(19-24.5) points. During the 6-month study period, 38 subjects (40.9%)
experienced at least one fall. The total TSLUMFA score in older adults
with incident fall(s) was significantly lower than in those who did not fall
(20 (15.75-22.25) points vs. 23 (20-25) points and a p-value of <0.001).
For each 1-point higher score at the total TSLUMFA a 9% less chance of
falling was observed during the study period (p-value=0.006). The AUC
was 0.736 (95%CI: 0.617-0.822) and p-value<0.001, clearly demonstrat-
ing its interesting performance as a screening tool. A score of ≤21 points
was identified as the optimal cutoff to identify those older adults at a
higher risk of falling.
Conclusion: The TSLUMFA performed well and successfully identified
older adults with a high risk of falling in a nursing home setting. Further
comparisons with existing tools are warranted.
P395
E M P L O Y M E N T
R E T E N T I O N
A M O N G S T
H I P
ARTHROPLASTY RECIPIENTS WHO RETURN TO WORK
E. Zaballa1, G. Ntani1, E. C. Harris1, A. Lübbeke-Wolff2, N. K. Arden3,
C. Cooper4, K. Walker-Bone1
1MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Health and Work,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK, 2Division of
Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Geneva University Hospitals,
Geneva, Switzerland, 3Centre for Sport, Exercise and Osteoarthritis
Research Versus Arthritis, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 4MRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK
Objective: To explore associations between exposure to physically de-
manding work performed after total hip arthroplasty (THA) and job loss
due to the replaced hip.
Methods: A postal survey was mailed to THA recipients from the
Geneva Hip Arthroplasty Registry and the Clinical Outcomes in
Arthroplasty study. To be eligible, patients needed to have received their
arthroplasty at least 5 y before and to have been aged 18-64 y at the time.
Data collection included: demographics, time to reach best function and
postoperative recreational activities. For each job held postoperatively,
participants self-reported exposure to a range of physically demanding
activities (standing, walking, kneeling/squatting, climbing ladders, dig-
ging). Cox proportional hazard models were used to estimate the effect of
occupational activities on the risk of job loss.
Results: Of the 817 respondents (57% response rate), 514 returned to
work (RTW) postoperatively. The median follow-up post-THA was 7.5 y
(IQR 6.2 -12.1). Occupational exposure information was available for
411 of the 514 who RTW (206 men, 205 women). Adjusted models
(age at operation, sex, BMI, time to reach best postoperative function,
cohort and follow-up) showed an increased risk of stopping work post-
THA in workers who needed to stand >4 h/d (HR:3.81, 95%CI 1.62-
8.96); kneel/squat (HR:95%CI 3.32, 1.46-7.55) and carry/lift >0 kg
(HR:5.43, 95%CI 2.29-12.88) compared with those who did not.
Mutually adjusted models showed that the effect of lifting/carrying
weights in excess of 10 kg remained statistically significant (p<0.01).
Conclusion: Jobs that entail standing, kneeling/squatting or lifting heavy
weights are more difficult to retain amongst THA recipients. These find-
ings need to be confirmed in other cohorts, but clinicians may need to
S230
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
discuss pre-operatively potential limitations of arthroplasty on work out-
comes and/or specialised rehabilitation may be required.
P396
HIGH ADHERENCE TO SECONDARY PREVENTION
TREATMENTS, LOW REHOSPITALIZATION AND
MORTALITY RATES AMONG OLDER ADULTS WITH HIP
FRACTURES ENTERED THE ORTHOGERIATRIC
OUTPATIENT SERVICE
M. Baroni1, A. R. Bianco1, M. Ferracci1, G. R. Talesa2, A. Cirimbilli2, V.
Prenni1, V. Bubba1, V. Boccardi1, G. Rinonapoli2, A. Caraffa2, P.
Mecocci1, C. Ruggiero1
1Geriatric & Orthogeriatric Unit, SM Misericordia Hospital, University of
Perugia, 2Orthopedic & Traumatologic Unit, SM Misericordia Hospital,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy
Objective: To compare the outcomes of hip fracture patients who entered
the interdisciplinary fracture liaison services (FLS) with those who follow-
ed the usual orthopedic care (UOC).
Methods: A prospective observational study including subjects aged ≥65
y hospitalized because of hip fracture. At the time of discharge, partici-
pants who underwent surgery were invited to enter FLS, received a sched-
ule of lab and x-ray exams and outpatient orthogeriatric assessment with-
in 30 d from surgery.
Results: Among 762 patients eligible within 1 y, 540 (71.0%) attended
the 30-d outpatient visit: 268 (49.6%) opted for FLS while 272 (50.3%)
for UOC. The patients who entered the FLS compared to those in the
UOC had higher 1-y adherence to vitamin D supplementation, plus cal-
cium if needed, as well as adherence to the specific antiosteoporosis drug
(75.1 vs. 8.0%; p<0.0001), and complete antifracture treatments (defined
as a combination of the specific antiosteoporosis drug plus vitamin D, and
calcium if needed) (72.3 vs. 5.7%; p<0.0001). The older adults who
entered the FLS experienced a long time of hospitalization-free survival
(176.4 vs. 88.7 d; p=0.0152) compared to those in UOC. Compared with
participants in the UOC, a tendency to a lower annual mortality rate (19.7/
100 vs. 25.5/100 person-years; HR=0.62; 95%CI 0.35; 1.09) was found
in those who entered the FLS group independent of confounders.
Conclusion: The FLS may increase initiation and adherence to
antifracture treatments over time. Compared with UOC, FLS may posi-
tively impact on health-related outcomes, such as time free from rehos-
pitalization and mortality rates.
P397
LEONIE STUDY: POOR COMPLIANCE WITH PATIENT
INSTRUCTIONS FOR TAKING ORAL BISPHOSPHONATES
(ORAL BPS)
K. Briot1, B. Cortet2, P. Fardellone3, T. Thomas4, F. Tremollières5
1Rhumatology, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, 2Rhumatology, CHU de Lille,
Lille, 3Rhumatology, CHU Amiens, Amiens, 4Rhumatology, Hôpital
Nord Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, 5Menopause, CHU Purpan,
Toulouse, France
Objective: To assess compliance with patient instructions with oral BPs
in osteoporotic women, especially the 4 cardinal points for an appropriate
intake (taken on an empty stomach, at least 30 min before the first food,
with a glass of plain water, staying in an upright position).
Methods: A nationally representative sample of 152 pharmacies was
constituted. A 37 questions questionnaire established by the scientific
study committee was proposed to women aged 60 and over visiting the
pharmacist for an oral BP drug delivery between January-June 2020. The
computer assisted telephone interview methodology was used. 254 pa-
tients (mean age 68.6±6.46 y) were interviewed. Diagnosis of osteoporo-
sis was defined either by BMD <-2.5 SD or a fragility fracture event
(respectively 57% and 43% of women). The treatment was prescribed
by GPs (63%) or Rheumatologist (31%), with a mean duration of 7.6
±7.3 . Alendronate accounted for 48% of prescriptions, risedronate 43%
and gastroresistant risedronate 9%.
Results: A high rate of poor compliance was observed: of all 230 patients
on non-gastroresistant oral BPs, 56% did not follow all the patient in-
structions. Of these, 19% ate food before taking the treatment and for
those who did not, 14% did not meet the 30-min fasting time. In total, the
fasting conditions were not followed by 30% of the patients. In addition,
28% of the patients took the treatment with mineral water (rich in calcium
for more than 50%) and 32% of them took the treatment with or after
other medications. 84% of the patients perceived their treatment positive-
ly, considering it as essential (57%) and easy to take (54%). The con-
straints linked to drug intake were spontaneously mentioned by 26% of
patients. In 41% of cases, the 4 cardinal points were mentioned on the
prescription.
Conclusion: The results of the LEONIE study show a high rate of poor
compliance with the patient instructions which are essential for a good
absorption of oral BPs, with the risk of poor bioavailability of drugs and
therefore reduced therapeutic efficacy. They strongly suggest that educa-
tion of physicians, pharmacists and patients to this issue is mandatory.
The use of gastro-resistant oral forms may also be of interest with the
objective of circumvent poor compliance to appropriate drug intake
conditions.
P398
CAPILLAROSCOPIC PROFILE IN UNDIFFERENTIATED
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
F. Mechid1, N. Bahaz1, H. Hafirassou1, R. Benaziez1, C. Dahou-
Makhloufi1
1University of Algiers Benyoucef Benkhedda, Mohamed Lamine
Debaghine Hospital, Algiers, Algeria
Objective: To describe microvascular damage in patients with undiffer-
entiated connective tissue disease (UCTD).
Methods: It is an observational and descriptive study. We enrolled 70
patients who have clinical and serological manifestations of systemic
autoimmune disease without fulfilling any of the existing classification
criteria, which defines UCTD. Nailfold capillaroscopy was performed to
all the patients. We identified demographic data, Raynaud phenomenon
(RP) and microvascular abnormalities.
Results: Among the 70 patients with UCTD, 54 (77%) were female and the
average age was 44 years old (range:16-70 y). 43 (61.4%) patients had RP.
A scleroderma pattern was found in 11.4% (8/70) of patients. Non-specific
capillaroscopic findings were observed in 86.04% of patients who have RP
vs. 48% without RP (P=0.0006). There was significantly higher major
capillary abnormalities in subjects with RP (72%) than in those without
this latter (18.51%), (P=10-5). However, there was no association between
RP and minor capillary abnormalities.
Conclusion: Our study showed that RP is very common in the UCTD. In
addition, RP seems to be related to nonspecific capillary abnormalities.
P399
OUR EXPERIENCE WITH TERIPARATIDE (FORSTEO) IN
PATIENTS WITH SEVERE OSTEOPOROSIS
V. P. Popova1, M. P. Gebeva0 Popova2, Z. V. Vazhev3, Y. R. Ronchev4,
K. K. Kraev2, A. B. Batalov2
1Medical University of Plovdiv, Dept. of Rheumatology, Medical
Faculty, 2Medical University of Plovdiv, Dept. of Rheumatology,
Medical Faculty, 3Medical University of Plovdiv, Dept. of Cardiac
Surgery, Medical Faculty, 4Medical University of Plovdiv, Dept. of
Inubilogy, Medical Faculty, Plovdiv, Bulgaria
Objective: Teriparatide is a recombinant human PTH containing 1-34
amino acid sequences of the natural PTH molecule. It is a unique anabolic
drug indicated for the treatment of severe postmenopausal osteoporosis in
women - initially untreated, as well as with an insufficient response from
S231
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
the current treatment, as well as in men with idiopathic osteoporosis and
androgen deficiency. It is also indicated for the treatment of glucocorti-
coid induced osteoporosis (GCS) induced osteoporosis for both sexes.
Methods: There were 12 female patients aged 65-82 y, of which 8 with 2-
4 vertebral fractures, in which the treatment with teriparatide is primary
and 4 patients with severe osteoporosis with insufficient response to the
current treatment - worsened indicators, in whom treatment is after 2
previous preparations. Mean baseline BMD T-score in the group with
vertebral fractures BMD T-score - 3.91 SD, and in the group without
fractures - BMD T-score - 3.89 SD. Patient observation period 36 months,
including 18 months of treatment with teriparatide and investigating pe-
riod of 18 months.
Results: No deterioration was observed in any patient - BMD T-score -
2.16 SD in the group with vertebral fractures, and BMD T-score - 1.92
SD in the group without vertebral fractures, in addition, in the control
DXA after another 18 months was there was a mean improvement in
scores of 0.3 in the first group and 0.24 in the second group of patients,
respectively. Pain assessment with the VAS index was significantly af-
fected after the end of teriparatide treatment - baseline levels of 92 and 85
mm, respectively, in both groups, and 36 and 32 mm, respectively, at the
end of treatment with permanent retention and thereafter.
Conclusion: Treatment with teriparatide is the tool of choice for severe
osteoporosis in the absence of contraindications for it with a powerful
anabolic effect that lasts permanently over time, ensuring a high quality of
life for our patients and indirectly reducing mortality in them.
P400
MANAGEMENT OF BISPHOSPHONATE (BP) RELATED
ATYPICAL FEMORAL FRACTURE (AFF)
A. Michael1, N. Obiechina2, Q. Mujeeb1
1Russells Hall Hospital, Dudley, 2Queen's Hospital, Burton, UK
Case report: A 72 years old female had a fall resulting in left neck of
femur fracture. She had alendronic acid 70 mg once weekly for 6 y and
was on a drug holiday for a year when she broke her left hip. The fracture
had radiological features suggestive of BP related AFF (Fig 1), and It was
repaired with intramedullary nail (IMN). DXA scan showed that the
overall lumbar spine T-score was -2.8, and at L3, T-score was -
4.2. Having fractured in a drug holiday, and with DXA evidence of
osteoporosis she was restarted on alendronic acid after a total of 20
months of drug holiday. Four years later, while on alendronic acid, she
sustained a twisting injury to her right leg and experienced right hip pain
for 3 months. X-ray was suggestive of healing bisphosphonate related
right femur AFF (Fig 2). The BP was stopped and she was treated
conservatively.
Discussion: AFF is a rare side effect of BP. An AFF is often complicated
by delayed or nonunion. Patients with unilateral AFF are likely to have a
contralateral AFF within a year.
To prevent AFF, patients should be calcium and vit D replete and the
therapy duration should be regularly reassessed. Patients should have
drug holidays when indicated. If patients develop thigh or groin pain they
should have an XR of the femur. And patients who sustain an AFF should
have an XR of the other femur.
Treatment: Discontinuation of the BP is essential. For complete AFF, an
orthopaedic intervention is needed. For incomplete AFF, conservative
management is the first step. Prophylactic nailing can be considered for
patients with pain or those who did not respond to 3 months of conser-
vative management. Teriparatide can be considered for AFF which do not
heal however more evidence is needed. There is no place for denosumab
in management of osteoporosis after BP related AFF. Also there is no
clear evidence to whether antiresorptive measures can be retried after a
certain period. There is a need for research to develop evidence based
recommendations for treatment of bisphosphonate related AFF.
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
P401
E X P L O R I N G
S H A R E D
P A T H O G E N E S I S
O F
OSTEOARTHRITIS AND METABOLIC SYNDROME BY
BIOINFORMATIC APPROACH
W. Dai1, Y. Cai2, X. Jiang3
1Decathlon International, Shanghai, China, 2University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany, 3Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China
Objective: Although increasing evidence has supported the close linkage
between osteoarthritis (OA) and metabolic syndrome (MS), the
interrelational mechanisms remain to be fully elucidated [1]. The aim of
this study is to explore the shared pathological processes of OA and MS.
Methods: The gene expression profiles of OA and MS were retrieved
from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The genes in the
key module of MS were identified by weighted gene coexpression net-
work analysis (WGCNA). The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in
MS were then intersected with genes in the key modules to obtain hub
genes for MS. Next, the potential functions and pathways of hub genes
were detected through the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Gene and Genome (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses. Finally,
single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) was operated to
calculate the enrichment score of the harvested KEGG pathways in the
control and OA patient samples.
S232
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: 51 modules were detected through the dynamic tree cutting
method, among which the skyblue module (R=0.48, P=0.007) and
indianred4 module (R=0.4, P=0.03) were positively correlated with
clinical traits of MS. Besides, 372 DEGs were screened between the
control and MS patient samples with 195 upregulated and 177
downregulated genes. The result of Venn analysis suggested that
61 hub genes related to MS were identified as hub genes by over-
lapping the 372 DEGs and 212 genes in the key module (Figure 2).
The KEGG result highlighted that the hub genes were mainly con-
centrated on platelet activation, complement and coagulation cas-
cades, and hematopoietic cell lineage. According to the selected
enriched pathways analyzed by the KEGG algorithm, we uncovered
that the pathways of arachidonic acid metabolism, fatty acid metab-
olism and platelet activation play a vital role in the pathogenesis of
OA (Figure 3).
Conclusion: Our work identified potential common pathogenesis of
OA and MS. These shared pathways might provide a novel idea
for further mechanistic studies in comorbidity between OA and
MS. Further studies will focus on identifying and validating hub
genes as potential target for both diagnosis and treatment of OA
and MS.
Reference: 1. Valdes, AM. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2020;28:7.
Figure 1. Workflow of this study.
Figure 2. Venn diagram of the overlap between DEGs (right circle) and
key module genes (left circle).
Figure 3. Differentiated expression of KEGG pathways in normal and OA
samples.
P402
MONTHLY CALCIFEDIOL 0.266 MG SOFT CAPSULES ARE
MORE EFFICCIENT AND PREDICTABLE THAN MONTHLY
CHOLECALCIFEROL 25000 IU: RESULTS FROM A 12-
MONTH RANDOMISED CLINICAL TRIAL
J. Del Pino-Montes1, J. L. Perez-Castrillón2, A. Dueñas-Laita3, G.
Hernández4, S. P. Chinchilla4, A. García-Bea5
1Hospital Universitario de Salamanca and Universidad de Salamanca,
Salamanca, 2Hospital Universitario Río Ortega and Universidad de
Valladolid, Valladolid, 3Hospital Universitario Río Hortega and
Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, 4Faes Farma, R&D and
Innovation Department, Leioa, 5Faes Farma, Medical Affairs, Leioa,
Spain
Objective: To assess the efficacy and safety of long-term treatment with
monthly calcifediol 0.266 mg soft capsules compared to monthly chole-
calciferol 25000 IU in vitamin D deficient postmenopausal women.
Methods: This was a phase III-IV, double blind, randomised, controlled,
multicentre superiority clinical trial. Postmenopausal women
(25(OH)D<20 ng/mL) were randomised to three arms: Group A1)
monthly calcifediol 0.266 mg for 12 months; Group A2) monthly
calcifediol 0.266 mg for 4 months followed by placebo for 8 months;
and Group B) monthly cholecalciferol 25000 IU for 12 months.
Results: 170 postmenopausal women were included in the PP popula-
tion, with mean basal 25(OH)D levels of 12.9±3.9 ng/mL. The primary
endpoint (at month 4) was previously reported. At month 12, the incre-
ments of 25(OH)D levels per microgram of drug administered represent-
ed an approximately 3.2 higher potency of calcifediol over cholecalciferol
(p<0.0001). When patients were divided into two groups according to
basal levels, the potency of calcifediol was 2.3 and 3.5 times higher than
cholecalciferol in subjects with basal 25(OH)D levels <10 ng/mL and
between 10-20 ng/mL, respectively. This difference in potency was due
S233
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
to fairly stable increments in calcifediol group, regardless of baseline
levels, but a different increment depending on basal 25(OH)D levels in
cholecalciferol group. After 4 months, a steady state was observed in
25(OH)D levels in both calcifediol (Group A1) and cholecalciferol
groups. 25(OH)D levels of Group A2 reverted to baseline by month 12.
After 12 months, the maximum 25(OH)D levels reached in any of the
study groups were far from the levels considered pathologic.
Conclusion: Monthly calcifediol is more potent and raises 25(OH)D
levels faster and in a more predictable way than cholecalciferol.
Maintained treatment with calcifediol has proven to be effective and safe,
reaching a steady state. Its maintenance is necessary to avoid returning to
basal levels.
Acknowledgments: Osteoferol Study Group principal investigators and
their teams: F Cereto, ML Brandi, E Jodar, JM Quesada-Gómez, JM
Olmos-Martínez, MA Colmenero- Camacho, R Alhambra, C Gómez-
Alonso, B Galarraga
Disclosures: Javier del Pino Consultant of: Gedeon, Grant/research sup-
port from: Roche, Bristol, Faes Farma, José Luis Pérez-Castrillón
Consultant of: Farmalider, Faes Farma, Gedeon-Richter, Grant/research
support from: Farmalider, Pfizer, Speakers bureau: Amgen, Lilly, MSD,
Faes Farma,Theramex, Grugentall, Antonio Dueñas-Laita Consultant of:
Faes Farma, Farmalider, Grant/researchsupport from: Pfizer, Speakers
bureau: Merk-Serono, Gonzalo Hernandez Employee of: Faes
Farma,Sandra Pamela Chinchilla Employee of: Faes Farma, Aintzane
García-Bea Employee of: Faes Farma
P403
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE FUNCTIONALITY OF
WOMEN'S KNEES WITH OSTEOARTHROSIS SUBMITTED
TO A PHYSICAL EXERCISE PROGRAM AND THE
VA RIA TION OF THE CTX-II BIOMARK ER FOR
DEGRADATION OF ARTICULAR CARTILAGE
P. R. Moraes1, H. H. Pohl1, A. R. M. Valim1
1Universidade de Santa Cruz do Sul, Santa Cruz do Sul, Brazil
Objective: To evaluate the serum levels of the CTX-II biomarker for
cartilage degradation and joint function in women with knee OA under-
going a planned practice of resisted physical exercises to strengthen the
knee muscles.
Methods: 29 women with knee OA, older than 50 y, were included in the
study. They underwent an intervention in the form of a program of a
planned exercise practice for strengthening the knee extensor and flexor
muscles for a period of 8 weeks. Before and after the end of the program,
the blood serum level of the CTX-II biomarker was analyzed, as well as the
WOMAC questionnaire and a sociodemographic and health questionnaire.
Results: There was a reduction in pain, stiffness and pre-intervention
physical function (p<0.001), with a mean magnitude of -5.52±2.59 points
(43%), -2.03±1.12 points (41%) and -18.21±8.64 points (43%), respec-
tively. Regarding the CTX-II outcome, the mean magnitude of 0.005
±0.180 ng/mL (2%) increase from pre-post-intervention was not suffi-
cient to be considered statistically significant (p=0.991) maintenance of
their concentrations. In order to verify the existence of associations be-
tween the WOMAC domains and the CTX-II concentrations, Spearman's
correlation tests were performed, where no significant correlations were
observed when compared to the pain score (p=0.724), stiffness (p=0.107)
and the physical function (p=0.296) at the pre-intervention with the CTX-
II concentration at the same time.
Conclusion: Although there was an improvement in pain, stiffness and
functionality after the intervention to strengthen knee flexors and exten-
sors, the same did not occur with CTX-II concentrations that remained
unchanged. Thus, there is not always an increase in joint degradation in
women with knee OA when submitted to resisted exercises for quadriceps
and hamstrings.
P404
THE SUPERIORITY OF DANCE IN IMPROVING JOINT
FUNCTION IN LADIES WITH KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
P. R. Moraes1, H. H. Hildegard1, A. R. M. Valim1
1Universidade de Santa Cruz do Sul, Santa Cruz do Sul, Brazil
Objective: To compare joint function among women with knee OA who
participate in a monitored physical activity program of stretches and re-
sistance exercises for senior citizens and among participants of a recrea-
tional dance group.
Methods: The study included 47 women with knee OA, older than 50 y.
One group, containing 25 participants, was from women participating in a
recreational dance group for the elderly; the other, a total of 22 women
performed a program of physical activity monitored stretching and resis-
tance exercises for the elderly. All were interviewed and answered a
sociodemographic and health questionnaire; in the same way, the joint
function was evaluated by the WOMAC questionnaire.
Results: The participants had similar sample characteristics regarding
sociodemographic and health characteristics. The participants in the phys-
ical activity group had a higher score in the WOMAC questionnaire in
relation to the dimensions of pain (p<0.001), as well as in stiffness
(p<0.001) and physical function (p<0.001), when compared to those in
the dance group.
Conclusion: These results demonstrate that women with knee OA who
participate in a recreational dance group, when compared with groups, prac-
tice monitored physical activity of stretching and resistance exercises for the
elderly, have less pain, less rigidity and better physical function knee.
P405
EFFECTS OF A 12-MONTH SUPERVISED EXERCISE
INTERVENTION ON VERTEBRAL FRACTURE INCIDENCE
IN PATIENTS WITH VERTEBRAL FRAGILITY FRACTURE
AND PATIENTS WITH A HIGH RISK OF FRACTURE
A. C. Guzmán-Rico1, F. Torres-Naranjo1, D. F. Solórzano-Moreno1, R.
G. González-Mendoza2, A. Gaytán-González2, J. R. López Y Taylor2
1Centro de Investigación Ósea y de la Composición Corporal, CIO,
2Instituto de Ciencias Aplicadas a la Actividad Física y al Deporte,
Centro Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de
Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico
S234
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Vertebral fractures are a significant independent risk for ver-
tebral and non-vertebral fragility fractures. Subjects with an incident ver-
tebral fragility fracture remain at imminent risk for further fragility frac-
tures within the next twelve months. Since factors such as impaired mo-
bility, previous falls, spinal curve deformity, and back extensor weakness
contribute to this risk, therapeutic exercise is a non-pharmacological in-
tervention that potentially reduces the risk of new onset fractures. This
study aimed to assess the effects of 12-month supervised spinal exercises
of proprioceptive extension and postural strengthening on vertebral frac-
ture rates in patients at high risk and incident vertebral fragility fractures.
Methods: We evaluated women aged 50 y or older with osteoporosis, at
least one incident vertebral fracture, and at high fracture risk. Clinical
history, physical capabilities, BMD, and vertebral morphology were
assessed at baseline, the 6th and 12th month. All participants conducted
a 30-min supervised program of physical exercises twice a week for 3
weeks. After that, they were instructed to perform the exercises 5 d/week
at home with periodic monthly supervision. The program consisted of
static and dynamic movements to strengthen the spinal extensor muscles,
increase mobility, and improve static and dynamic posture. Loads and
volumes were calculated individually. Resistance bands and body weight
were used. All patients received specific medical treatment for
osteoporosis.
Results: 51 women 50-85 years old (mean 65.2, SD 6.6) with osteopo-
rosis (T-score mean -2.9, SD 0.98) and at least one incident vertebral
fracture or with a very high risk of fracture were evaluated, 48 participants
completed the follow-up. At baseline, 62.7% of the patients presented
some postural alteration, 47% a limited range of motion of joints
(ROM), and 35% at least one fall in the last year. By the end of the
follow-up, there were no new vertebral fractures nor worsening of
existing ones. All patients showed improvements in posture, ROM, and
fall frequency.
Conclusion: Our observations suggest that a twelve-month supervised
exercise program is safe in populations at high risk for fracture when
standard osteoporosis treatment is given. In addition to that, it can provide
other benefits, such as better back mobility, and perhaps help reduce the
risk of fractures. Controlled clinical trials designed to assess the contri-
bution of an exercise-based intervention on fracture risk are foreseen.
P406
FRACTURE LIAISON SERVICE (FLS) IN MANAGING
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURE IN TERTIARY HOSPITAL
CENTRE, MALAYSIA
J. F. Leong1, K. X. L. Law1, N. S. Z. Abidin1, L. K. Belani1, H.
Mahadzir2, D. K. A. Singh3, N. A. Wahab4, M. K. Yin5, Z. A. Samad6,
S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic & Traumatology Dept., Hospital
Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, 2Geriatric Unit, Dept. of Internal Medicine,
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, 3Center of Health Aging and
Wellness, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
4Endocrine Unit, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Hospital Canselor Tuanku
Muhriz, 5Dept. of Pharmacy, Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, 6Dept.
of Rehabilitation, Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia
Objective: Osteoporosis management following a fragility fracture has
been poor across the globe. Leong JF et al (2018) demonstrated that only
19% of patients have been given antiosteoporotic medication following a
fragility fracture at UKM Medical Centre (UKMMC). FLS is a multidis-
ciplinary systemic approach to reduce subsequent fracture risk in patients
with a recent fragility fracture which include appropriate medication treat-
ments with monitoring of compliance and adherence. The aim of the
study is to evaluate the effectiveness of FLS in improving management
following fragility fracture in UKMMC.
Methods: It is a prospective study of patients with recent fragility fracture
from January 2019 to December 2019. Data collected included
demographic and drug prescriptions related to osteoporosis treatment.
The data was then compared with previous study from January 2016 to
December 2016 before implementation of FLS.
Results: 242 patients were identified with a mean age of 76 years old.
Majority were females (78.9%) and highest incidence were the Chinese
(63.2%) followed by Malays (25.6%) and Indians (11.2%). Fractures
sustained were hip (38.2%), wrist (23.9%), spine (16.9%), other lower
limbs (11.1%), other upper limbs (4.1%) and more than one fractures
(5.4%). There was a significant increase in patients getting
antiosteoporotic treatment from 19% to 72%. Supplement prescription
have also improved from 54.6% to 91.3% for calcium and 43% to
90.1% for vitamin D. With FLS, the percentage of patients having
BMD assessment have also improve from 18.6% to 54.5%. Patients ad-
herence to antiosteoporotic medication was 83% for 6 months and 82.3%
for 12 months.
Conclusion: FLS has proven to be effective in improving drug prescrip-
tion and adherence among patients with recent fragility fractures. As a
result, our hospital was the first hospital in Malaysia to be awarded the
Silver Award by the International Osteoporosis Foundation for ‘Capture
the Fracture Best Practice’.
P407
BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO
MUSCLE STRENGTH IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
WITH KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
J. Averkieva1, T. Raskina1, M. Letaeva1, M. Koroleva1, O. Malyshenko1
1Kemerovo State Medical University, Kemerovo, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the relationship between the state of BMD and
muscle strength of the hand and in postmenopausal women with osteo-
arthritis (OA) of the knee joint.
Methods: The study included 50 female patients (mean age 64 (58.3; 66)
y) with a diagnosis of knee joint OA established according to the ACR
criteria (1991). The control group consisted of 50 women without clinical
signs of OA (mean age 64 (60.3; 68) y).
Results: Osteopenic syndrome (OPS) in the study cohort was detected in
95 (95%) women. In the group of women with OA of the knee joint OPe
in 24 (48%), OP in 23 (46%). In patients with OA of the knee joint, OPe
was recorded significantly more often (p=0.029) than in the control
group. OP, on the contrary, was more common in women without OA
of the knee joint (p=0.024). The median index of carpal dynamometry in
the group of patients with OA of the knee joint was 17.4 (16.8;18.4) kg,
which was significantly lower than the same indicator in the control
group-18.9 (17.6; 21.7) kg (p<0.001). It was found that in women with
OA of the knee joint, the absolute value of muscle strength decreased in
direct proportion to the decrease in BMD (p<0.001). Thus, in patients
with normal BMD, this indicator was 20.0 (20.0; 20.1) kg, in women with
OPe-18.2 (17.3;18.6) kg, in patients with OP-16.9 (16.4; 17.3) kg.
According to the results of the correlation analysis, it was found that the
indicators of carpal dynamometry significantly positively correlated with
the T-criterion of the femoral neck and lumbar spine (r=0.450, p=0.001
and r=0.664, p<0.001, respectively). A similar relationship of muscle
strength was established with the BMD of the femoral neck and lumbar
spine (r=0.484, p<0.001 and r=0.678, p<0.001, respectively).
Conclusion: A decrease in BMD in women with OA was significantly
associated with a significant decrease in muscle strength.
P408
INCIDENCE OF SUBSEQUENT FRACTURE FOLLOWING
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURE IN A FRACTURE LIAISON
SERVICE HOSPITAL: A PROSPECTIVE STUDY
J. F. Leong1, S. T. Ooi1, D. G. R. Rao1, K. X. L. Law1, N. S. Z. Abidin1,
L. K. Belani1, R. A. Rani1, A. F. Don1, S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic & Traumatology Dept., Hospital
Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
S235
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Patients who sustained an osteoporotic fracture are at in-
creased risk of sustaining another fracture hence efforts are directed to-
wards secondary fracture prevention. The aim of this study was to deter-
mine the incidence of subsequent fractures in patients with fragility frac-
ture and to look at their general health outcomes in a tertiary hospital
center with the availability of Fracture Liaison Service (FLS).
Methods: We analyzed our FLS registry and a prospective observational
cohort study was performed from August 2018 to February 2019. These
patients with osteoporotic fractures were identified the first 6 months and
a minimum follow-up of one year to determine the risk of secondary
fracture. The demographic data, quality of life and physical activities,
and prevalence of antiosteoporotic medication were also identified.
Results: A total of 124 patients (31 males, 93 females) were identified.
Majority sustained hip fractures (n=72, 58.1%), followed by wrist frac-
ture (n=16, 12.9%), spine (n=14, 11.3%), other lower limb fracture
(n=13, 10.4%) and other upper limb fractures (n=9, 7.3%). The incidence
of subsequent fracture was 3.2% (n=4) within one year. The mortality rate
was 18.2% (n=31). During the study period, Patients were prescribed
with calcium (n=114, 91.9%), vitamin D (n=115, 91.9%) and
antiosteoporotic drugs (n=100, 80.6%). Katz ADL score showed that
patients with conservative treatment were not be able to get full functional
status after one year compared with those with surgical treatment
(P<0.05).
Conclusion: Incidence of subsequent fracture following fragility fracture
within one-year in our study was 3.2% which is comparative with other
studies in a hospital with FLS. The mortality rate in fragility fracture
patients was 18.2% and majority were hip fracture patients.
P409
BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND RISK FACTORS FOR
OSTEOPOROSIS IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH
KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
J. Averkieva1, T. Raskina1, M. Koroleva1, M. Letaeva1, O. Malyshenko1
1Kemerovo State Medical University, Kemerovo, Russia
Objective: To evaluate BMD and risk factors for osteoporosis (OP) in
postmenopausal women with knee OA.
Methods: The study included 100 female patients aged 44-75 y, includ-
ing 50 patients with OA of the knee joints and 50 comparable age women
without OA. The survey established the presence of the following main
risk factors for the development of OP: age 65 y and older, the presence of
previous low-energy fractures, family history of OP, low weight (<57 kg)
or low BMI (<20 kg/m2), smoking.
Results: The value of the BMD and T-test in the femoral neck in patients
without OA was significantly lower both in comparison with the indicators
of patients with stage I–II and stage III–IV OA. Thus, the BMD in the
femoral neck in women without OA was 0.712 (0.632; 0.764) g/cm2, which
corresponded to -2.40 (-2.70; -2.00) CO according to the T-criterion
(p<0.001). The BMD of the indicated localization in patients with stage
I–II OA was 0.889 (0.824; 0.943) g/cm2 and corresponded to -1.75 (-2.27; -
1.13) CO according to the T-criterion (p<0.001), in patients with stage III–
IV – 0.913 (0.813; 1.02) g/cm2 and -1.60 (-1.72; -1.3) CO according to the
T-criterion (p=0.001). When comparing the BMD and T-test in the lumbar
spine, no significant differences were found between the study groups
(p>0.050). When analyzing the occurrence of a family history of osteopo-
rosis, it was noted that this risk factor was registered with a higher frequency
in women without OA and with OA of stage I–II (58.0 and 68.4%, respec-
tively) compared to the same indicator in the group of patients with OA of
stage III–IV (25.5%) (p=0.049 and p=0.345, respectively). The remaining
risk factors for OP were found with a comparable frequency in all three
groups of patients.
Conclusion: The presence of OA in postmenopausal women is associat-
ed with higher rates of BMD in the femoral neck.
P410
CERULOPLASMIN: A SURROGATE MARKER OF
OSTEOPOROSIS
S. Das1, S. Verma2
1Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Delhi, 2SMSR, Noida, India
Objective: Osteoporosis is a bone disorder and is currently a major global
health issue. Ceruloplasmin (CP) is an acute phase reactant and antioxi-
dant, characterized by ferroxidase activity and increases in inflammation.
C-reactive protein (CRP), an acute phase protein belonging to pentraxin
family of proteins. This study was designed to investigate the role of acute
phase reactants CP and CRP in the screening of osteoporosis. This study
aimed to evaluate the role of serum CP and CRP as biomarkers
of osteoporosis.
Method: This study was conducted in the Bone Clinic and the biochem-
istry department of a tertiary care hospital. 120 participants were included
in the study belonging to the age group of 50-80 y. Participants in the
group were divided into two groups, group I comprising of patients with
osteoporosis, and group II consisted of patients without osteoporosis
(n=56) (control group) (n=64). Patients were classified into the two
groups on the basis of BMD measurements using DXA scanning. CRP
and serum CP levels were analyzed in blood samples by
immunoturbidimetry.
Results: Serum CP levels were significantly higher in osteoporosis pa-
tients as compared to the control group. A significant positive correlation
(r=0.92, p<0.05) was observed between higher serum levels of CP and
higher levels of CRP in the osteoporosis patients. There was a significant
difference in the CP levels of the osteoporosis group (68.4±7.2 mg/dl )
and the control group (37.3±4.9 mg/dl) (p<0.05). CRP levels also differed
significantly among the osteoporosis patients (2.23±0.68 mg/dl) and the
control participants (1.07±0.42 mg/dl) (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that measurement of serum CP
levels has potential as a surrogate marker for patients with osteoporosis
P411
MORTALITY OUTCOME OF OSTEOPOROTIC HIP
F R A C T U R E : O P E R A T I V E V S . N O N O P E R A T I V E
INTERVENTION
N. S. Z. Abidin1, J. F. Leong1, K. X. L. Law1, L. K. Belani1, R. A. Rani1,
A. F. Don1, S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic & Traumatology Dept., Hospital
Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Objective: Hip fractures are common in the elderly and the mortality rate
of these patients have been well documented with a rate of approximately
10% and 30% at one month and one year respectively. The aim of this
study is to compare the outcomes following hip fracture between those
treated operatively and nonoperative management.
Methods: Demographic and clinical data of patients admitted to Hospital
Canselor Tuanku Muhriz aged 60 and above with osteoporotic hip frac-
tures from January-December 2019 were reviewed. The data on mortality
and cause of death were collected retrospectively through the hospital
electronic medical record and telephone interviews.
Results: A total of 112 patients were included in the study with a mean
age of 76.9±8.9 (68.2% female, 31.8% male). The majority of patients
were Chinese (68.2%) followed by Malays (21.8%) and Indians (9.2%).
50 patients were treated surgically and 62 were treated conservatively.
The overall 1-y mortality rate following an osteoporotic hip fracture in
2019 was 17.0%. The 6-month and 1-y mortality were higher (15 and
25% respectively) in the nonoperative group. There were no deaths re-
ported at month six while two patients (4%) died by the end of the first
year in the operative group. The majority of patients treated conservative-
ly were cited as unfit for surgery (66.2%). Other reasons for nonoperative
treatment include personal choice (21.5%) and cost (10.8%). The most
S236
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
common causes of death recorded in the nonoperative group were sepsis
(33.3%), old age (20.0%) and renal failure (13.3%).
Conclusion: The overall mortality outcomes of hip fractures were lower
in the operative group. The 1-y mortality rate in conservatively treated
patients were similar to published data. Therefore, osteoporotic hip frac-
ture patients should be advised to undergo surgical management to pre-
vent further complications and patient should be counselled the risk if
treated conservatively.
P412
OSTEOPOROSIS KNOWLEDGE AND AWARENESS AMONG
MEDICAL STUDENTS IN MALAYSIA
K. X. L. Law1, J. F. Leong1, N. S. Z. Abidin1, S. T. Ooi1, D. G. R. Rao1,
L. K. Belani1, S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic & Traumatology Dept., Hospital
Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Objective: Osteoporosis is a prevalent health problem in an ageing pop-
ulation like Malaysia. Increasing the knowledge and awareness of osteo-
porosis is essential in efforts to decrease the incidence of osteoporosis.
Hence, emphasis on this topic in the undergraduate medical curriculum is
essential as medical students are the future frontliners in our healthcare
system. Our aim is to assess osteoporosis knowledge and awareness
among medical students in our institution.
Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted among Year 4 medical
students undergoing Orthopaedic rotation at Faculty of Medicine,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. The students were divided into two
groups. One group was assessed at the beginning of the rotation and the
second group was assessed at the end of the rotation where an osteopo-
rosis module was delivered. Assessment of knowledge and awareness of
osteoporosis was completed using validated Osteoporosis
Questionnaire(OPQ).
Results: A total of 72 Year 4 medical students were enrolled in our study.
The mean total OPQ score was (14.4±4.6) Students who attended osteo-
porosis module were found to have significantly higher (p≤0.001) mean
OPQ scores (16.7±3.4); as compared to the group of students at the start
of rotation with mean score (10.7±3.9). Mean score was also analysed
based on each component of OPQ. Students who completed the module
performed better with mean score of general information (4.1±1.1), risk
factors (6.2±1.1), consequences (3.3±1.2) and treatment of osteoporosis
(3.2±1.2) compared to the other group with mean score of general infor-
mation (3.2±1.2), risk factors (4.8±1.9), consequences (1.4±1.4) and
treatment of osteoporosis (1.4±2.0). They were also able to provide more
detailed description of osteoporosis, wider range of treatment options and
more aware of disease complication than the other group.
Conclusion: The OPQ mean score of Year 4 medical students who had
gone through the module was higher than those who had not.
Osteoporosis modules can improve knowledge and awareness among
medical students. The gap in osteoporosis knowledge was more pro-
nounced in the domain of risk factors and consequences compared to
general information and treatment of osteoporosis.
P413
IS PLASMA PARATHYROİD HORMONE RELATED PEPTIDE
REALLY RELATED WİTH BONE MINERAL DENSITY IN
EUGONADAL PROLACTINOMA PATIENTS?
A. Okyar Baş1, M. Ci̇nel2,?. Demi̇r2
1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Internal Medicine,
2Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Internal Medicine,
Endocrinology & Metabolic Diseases, Ankara, Turkey
Objective: There are various hypotheses for the aetiology of osteoporosis
in patients with prolactinoma, and the increased level of the parathyroid
hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) is one of them.1 This study aims to
investigate the presence of increased PTHrP and its possible effects on
BMD in premenopausal women and men with normal gonadal function
by excluding the negative effect of prolactin on the gonadal system.
Methods: We enrolled in 29 eugonadal prolactinoma patients and 31
healthy individuals. Serum prolactin, gonadal steroids, TSH, fT3, fT4,
calcium, phosphorus, albumin, PTH, alkaline phosphatase,
25OHvitaminD, 24-h urine calcium, PTHrP and BMD (lumbar spine,
femur, radius) were measured from participants.
Results: Between the prolactinoma patients and the control group, there
was no statistically significant difference in PTHrP levels (p=0.288). Both
in the control group and the study group, the PTHrP levels were higher in
men than in women (p<0.05). The relationship between the serum levels
of PTHrP and BMD in g/cm2 was evaluated, and no statistically signifi-
cant relationship was observed (p=0.330 for the femur, p=0.389 for the
lumbar vertebrae, for the radius: 0.938).
Conclusion: Contrary to studies in which the elevated level of PTHrP has
been reported as one of the factors that play a role in the development of
osteoporosis in patients with prolactinoma, no significant relationship
found in this study. As this study is the first study claiming physiological
PTHrP level differences between genders, further large-sampled studies
needed to confirm this finding.
Reference: 1. Stiegler C, et al. J Bone Miner Res 1995;10:751.
P414
CLUSTER ANALYSIS OF PATIENT-REPORTED OUTCOME
M E A S U R E S
O F
A D U L T S
W I T H
X - L I N K E D
HYPOPHOSPHATAEMIA
S. Cole1, M. T. Sanchez-Santos1, S. Kolovos1, M. K. Javaid1, R. Pinedo-
Villanueva1
1University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Objective: To identify distinct subgroups of adults with X-linked
hypophosphataemia (XLH) based on their patient-reported outcomes.
Methods: We used data from adults with XLH registered in RUDY, a
UK rare diseases cohort study. We applied cluster analysis using the K-
means method to 7 patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs): EQ5D-
5L and SF-36 physical and mental component scores (PCS and MCS) as
measures of quality of life (QoL), FACIT-F of fatigue, PainDETECT and
SF-MPQ-2 of pain, PSQI of sleep quality, and HADS of anxiety and
depression. Instruments’ scores were standardised so that all variables
would be comparable. The average silhouette and elbow method were
used to determine the optimal number of clusters.
Results: 17 participants (76.5% females, median age 41 y) completed all
seven PROMs at their first submission. Optimal number of clusters was
two. The “higher-score” cluster included 11 participants reporting higher
(better) mean QoL scores compared to the “lower-score” group (EQ5D-
5L=0.817, PCS=45.40 and MCS=51.31, compared to 0.288, 19.54, and
43.44, respectively). They also reported better sleep quality (PSQI=7.64
compared to 12.67), less fatigue (FACIT-F=125.32 vs. 78.00), less pain
(SF-MPQ-2=1.03 compared to 3.58), and lower likelihood of being
categorised with neuropathic pain (PainDETECT=5.64 vs. 14.17) and
depression (HADS=3.18 vs. 8.17). Anxiety was found to be similar be-
tween clusters (HADS=6.73 vs. 6.50).
Conclusion: This analysis shows that adults diagnosed with XLH report
broadly heterogenous PROMs which, even with a limited sample size,
allow them to be split into two very distinct subgroups, one with consis-
tently better pain, sleep, fatigue, and depression than the other.
Comparisons with other rare disease groups, other musculoskeletal con-
ditions, and the general population would provide an important
benchmark.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank both the RUDY team and
participants of the RUDY study who have enabled this work.
Disclosure: This research was partially funded through a grant from
Kiowa Kirin International; they had no part in the conduct or shaping
of the study.
S237
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P415
R I S K
O F
F R A C T U R E S
I N
P A T I E N T S
W I T H
OPPORTUNISTICALLY IDENTIFIED VERTEBRAL
FRACTURES: AN OBSERVATIONAL COHORT STUDY
M. K. Skjødt1, C. Libanati2, J. Nicolaes2, A. Moayyeri2, K. R. Olsen3, C.
Cooper4, B. Abrahamsen1
1Dept. of Medicine, Hospital of Holbæk, Holbæk, Denmark, 2UCB
Pharma, Brussels, Belgium, 3DaCHE, Institute of Public Health,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 4MRC Lifecourse
Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton General
Hospital, Southampton, UK
Objective: To assess the risk of subsequent fractures in subjects with
opportunistically identified vertebral fractures (VF) vs. subjects with no
VF on CT scans performed as part of daily clinical practice.
Methods: This is an observational cohort study in 2000 men and women
≥50 y, undergoing a CT scan of the chest and/or abdomen in 2010-
2011 at Holbæk Hospital, Denmark. The CT scans were reevaluated to
identify prevalent VF in a process blinded to clinical information.
Subjects were excluded if they had no or less than 1 year registry data
available, if migrated before baseline (date of CT), or if treated with anti-
osteoporosis medications in the year prior to baseline. Subjects with VF
on the CT were matched on age and gender against those with no VF in a
1:2 ratio, to form the exposed (VF on CT) and comparator (no VF)
cohorts. The cohorts were followed for up to 7 y in the Danish health
registers. The primary outcome was the risk of any fracture (excluding
face, skull and digits) from baseline until censored in the exposed vs the
comparator cohort, evaluated by Cox proportional hazards regression
analysis.
Results: Of the 2000 CT scans, 423 had at least one prevalent VF
(21.2%), while 1577 had no visible VF. After exclusion and matching,
325 subjects were included in the exposed cohort (VF on CT) and 605 in
the comparator cohort (no VF). Median age was 72 y in both cohorts and
54% were men. Mean follow-up was 2.3 and 3.48 y in the exposed and
the comparator cohort, respectively, during which a total of 31 and 49
fractures were accrued. Incidence rates were 41.47 and 23.27 fractures per
1000 patient-years. The crude hazard ratio was 1.74 (1.11-2.73; p<0.05).
Conclusion: Subjects with opportunistically identified VF on CT scans
performed as part of daily clinical practice and not treated with anti-
osteoporosis medications face a significantly increased risk of subsequent
fractures as compared to subjects with no VF. Identifying these individ-
uals offers an opportunity to improve secondary fracture prevention.
Acknowledgements: UCB and Amgen co-funded this study. All statis-
tical analyses carried out by MKS.
Disclosures: MKS: Institutional research grant, UCB/Amgen.
Educational grant, UCB.
CL, JN, AM: Employee and stock ownership, UCB Pharma. KRO: No
disclosures. CC: Personal fees from Alliance for Better Bone Health,
Amgen, Eli Lilly, GSK, Medtronic, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche,
Servier, Takeda and UCB. BA: Speakers fees/consulting fees from
UCB, MSD, Amgen, Kyowa-Kirin and Pharmacosmos and institutional
research grants from Novartis, UCB/Amgen, Kyowa-Kirin and
Pharmacosmos.
P417
FAMILIAL ASSOCIATIONS IN BONE AS MEASURED BY
PQCT, HR-PQCT AND DXA
C. M. Parsons1, N. Fuggle1, M. Ó Breasail2, M. Clynes1, G. Bevilacqua1,
S. Carter1, E. M. Dennison1, C. Cooper1, K. A. Ward1
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, 2MRC Nutrition
and Bone Health Group, Cambridge, UK
Objective: Bone microarchitecture, as well as BMD, contributes to frac-
ture risk. Previous studies have reported familial associations in areal
BMD (aBMD), but none have studied a combination of pQCT and
DXA measures. The aim of this study was to explore parent-to-child
associations in bone size, geometry, and microarchitecture using data
collected from the Hertfordshire Cohort Study (HCS).
Methods: Data from three generations of community- dwelling HCS
study participants were collapsed into parent-to-child pairs to maximise
statistical power. All participants underwent pQCT (Stratec XCT2000L),
HR-pQCT (XTreme I, Scanco), and DXA (iDXA, GE-Lunar) (hip, spine)
scans. Images of the non-dominant tibia were obtained from pQCT and
HR-pQCT. Due to lack of clustering within family lines, linear regression
was used to explore associations between parent-to-child bone parame-
ters, adjusting for age and sex of parent and child, and child’s social class
and height. Results are presented as β (95% confidence interval).
Results: Parents (n=61) had a mean age of 69 (range 49-88) years and
74% (n=45) were women. Children (n=64) had a mean age of 42 (range
18-65) years and 72% (n=46) were women. Positive parent-to-child as-
sociations were found between tibial total volumetric BMD (vBMD, mg/
cm3) at the 4% slice (0.47 (0.15,0.79)), and tibial cortical area (mm2),
cortical thickness (mm) and total area (mm2) at the 38% slice ((0.52
(0.24,0.81), (0.37 (0.10,0.64) and (0.30 (0.01,0.60) respectively) obtained
from pQCT scans. Positive parent-to-child associations were also ob-
served for tibial trabecular vBMD (mg/cm3), tibial trabecular number
(mm-1) and tibial trabecular thickness (mm) ((0.49 (0.11,0.88), (0.28
(0.01,0.54) and (0.32 (0.01, 0.63) respectively) obtained from HR-
pQCT scans. These findings are consistent with iDXA-measured
aBMD, with positive parent-to-child associations in BMD (g/cm2) ob-
served at the total hip and lumbar spine ((0.41 (0.13,0.70)) and (0.47
(0.26,0.69), respectively).
Conclusion: This is the first study using pQCT, HR-pQCT, and iDXA
imaging in parents and children. Our results demonstrated a familial as-
sociation in vBMD, likely due to associations in trabecular
microarchitecture and cortical bone parameters. These results provide
further evidence of familial associations in bone size, strength, and
geometry.
P418
PREVALENCE OF FRAGILITY FRACTURES IN PRIMARY
CARE IN SPAIN: FINAL RESULTS OF THE PREFRAOS
STUDY
C. Carbonell1, D. Martínez-Laguna2, J.-C. Bastida3, M. González4, R. M.
Micó-Pérez5, F. Vargas6, M. Balcells-Oliver7, L. Canals8
1GREMPAL Investigation Group, IDIAP Jordi Gol. Health Center Vía
Roma, Barcelona, 2GREMPAL Investigation Group, IDIAP Jordi Gol.
Health Center Sant Martí de Provençals, Barcelona, 3Health Center of
Marín, Pontevedra, 4Health Center of Montesa, Madrid, 5Health Center
of Fontanars dels Alforins, EAP Ontinyent, Valencia, 6Health Center Dr.
Guigou, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, 7Medical Dept., Amgen SA, Barcelona,
8Medical Dept., Amgen GmbH, Zug, Switzerland
Objective: Some studies suggest underdiagnosis and inadequate treat-
ment of osteoporosis (OP) among elderly subjects. Recent data on the
prevalence of fragility fractures (FF) in this population is lacking. The
objectives of this study were 1) to estimate the prevalence of FF among
subjects ≥70 years old seen in Spanish primary care (PC) and 2) to de-
scribe the main OP characteristics and management of subjects with at
least one FF.
Methods: This retrospective, observational study was conducted in
Spanish PC centers and comprised two phases (A and B). Phase A in-
cluded all women and men ≥70 years old listed in the investigator´s
medical records from November 2018-March 2020. Phase B included
subjects with a recorded FF and prior consultation at the center for any
reason. The main outcomes were the prevalence of FF and the prevalence
by geographic regions. Only the results of Phase A are presented.
Results: 30 PC centers across 14 Spanish Regions participated. In Phase
A, 44,062 medical records were reviewed, 20.2% (8,904) were subjects
≥70 years old. The majority of these eligible subjects were women (5,350/
S238
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
8,904 [60.1%]). The prevalence of FF is summarized in Table 1. Between
regions, Murcia had the highest and Galicia the lowest prevalence.
Conclusion: This study showed the high prevalence of FF in subjects ≥70
years old, especially in women (2-3-fold more prevalent in relation to
men), in the Spanish PC setting and vertebral fracture as the most com-
mon fracture. These results highlight the need to improve the risk assess-
ment in elderly subjects.
Disclosures: DML: personal fees from Amgen, Lilly, Novartis, Ferrer,
Rubió and Italfarmaco. JCB: personal fees from AstraZeneca, Esteve,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer, Abbott, Almirall, Amgen, Chiessi,
FAES, Grunenthal, GSK, Lilly, Menarini, MSD, Pfizer, Recordatti,
Rovi, Servier; MG: personal fees from Amgen, Stada, Rubió,
Grünenthal; RMP: fees from Amgen, UCB, Stada, Angelini, Gebro;
FV: personal fees from Pfizer, Grünenthal, MSD, Amgen, GSK, Lilly,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Servier, P&G Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Almirall,
Sanofi, Mundipharma; MB and LC: Amgen employees.
P419
A STUDY TO EVALUATE THE ASSOCIATION OF
MAGNESIUM LEVELS WITH HAND GRIP STRENGTH IN
GERIATRIC PATIENTS WITH HIP FRACTURE
S. Das1, S. Verma2
1Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Delhi, 2SMSR, Noida, India
Objective: Magnesium, is a macronutrient that plays a key role in several
cellular processes. It is an essential mineral for bone metabolism. Not
much is known about the association of magnesium and the risk of hip
fractures in the Asian population. In this case-control study, we evaluate
the relationship between serum magnesium level and the risk of incident
hip fracture. The purpose of this study was to investigate the association
between magnesium and hand grip strength in hip fracture risk in the
geriatric population (age >65 y) residing in north India.
Methods: 75 patients with hip fracture (Group I) and a similar number of
controls (Group II) were enrolled in the study. Samples were analyzed for
serum levels of magnesium, 25 hydroxyvitamin D, alkaline phosphatase,
calcium, and phosphate by immunoassay. The hand grip strength of study
subjects was measured using a dynamometer. Correlation between mag-
nesium levels and hand grip strength was analyzed in the study
population.
Results: Among the 75 subjects, 36 were men and 39 were women. The
mean age of hip fracture cases was 63.7±8.4 y which was comparable in
men and women. Hypomagnesemia was observed in the hip fracture
group (1.43±2.36 mg/dl) whereas magnesium level in the control group
was normal (2.35±3.86 mg/dl) (p<0.05). 25 hydroxyvitamin D levels
were significantly lower in cases (9.63±4.53 ng/ml) as compared to con-
trols (24.38±5.27 ng/ml). The mean hand grip strength among the hip
fracture group (18.31±4.69 kg) was significantly lower compared to that
of the control group (31.54±6.12 kg). There was a significant positive
correlation between magnesium levels and hand grip strength (r=0.74,
p<0.05) in the hip fracture population.
Conclusion: Hand grip strength as measured by handheld dynamometer
was significantly lower in geriatric hip fracture patients, and there is a
significant positive correlation between magnesium and hand grip
strength.
P420
LACTOSE MALABORSORPTION AS AN ADDITIONAL RISK
FACTOR OF OSTEOPOROSIS AND OSTEOPOROTIC
FRACTURES IN PATIENTS WITH TYPE 1 DIABETES
MELLITUS
A. B. Andrusha1
1Kharkiv National Medical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine
Objective: To assess the probability of osteoporotic fractures (POPF) and
the degree of osteodeficiency in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus
(DM) with lactase malabsorption (LM).
Methods: The study included 34 patients with DM type 1, which were
divided into 2 groups depending on the presence or absence of LM (16
patients were group I and 18 patients group II). To diagnose LM, we used
a glycemic load test with lactose, a test for hydrogen content in exhaled
air, and an analysis of stool acidity. BMD was assessed by DXA, and the
POPF was calculated by the FRAX and QFracture tools. The statistical
significance of differences in the studied parameters was evaluated by the
nonparametric method (by χ2 criterion).
Results: The DXA results revealed a significant difference in the frequen-
cy of osteoporosis between the groups. In the first group 81.3% of pa-
tients had osteoporosis, while in the second group - 55.6% (χ2=4.864,
df=1, p=0.027). POPF was equally high in both groups of patients when
evaluated with FRAX, while there was a significant difference in POPF
among both groups using QFracture - in 87,5% patients of the first group
and 61.1% of patients of the second group had high or medium values of
POPF (χ2=9.01, df=1, p=0.003). According to the QFracture algorithm,
the cutoff values for the beginning of antiosteoporotic treatment were
noted in 31.3% of the respondents of the first group, and the indicators
that require BMD evaluation (the result is in the so-called "yellow zone")
in 56.3%.
Conclusion: Patients with DM type 1 and LM are more likely to have
osteoporosis and a significantly higher POPF compared to patients with
isolated DM type 1. POPF does not always correspond to low BMD,
indicating deterioration in bone quality. When deciding on the need for
antiosteoporotic therapy of patients with DM type 1 and LM, it is neces-
sary to take into account not only the results of DХA, but also the POPF
assessed by the QFracture tool.
P421
P R E - O P E R A T I V E C O G N I T I O N I S I N V E R S E L Y
CORRELATED WITH POST-OPERATIVE DELIRIUM IN
ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH ACUTE HIP FRACTURE
O. Nonyelum1, A. Nandi1, R. Khan1, K. T. Ling1, M. Seegoolam1, R.
Ayesha1, G. McDevitt1, T. Anna Nida1
1University Hospital of Derby and Burton, Dept. of Medicine for Elderly,
Queens Hospital Burton, Burton on Trent, UK
Objective: Delirium is common in post-operative hip fracture patients. It
is associated with increased mortality, morbidity, length of stay and great-
er likelihood of institutionalization. Risk factors that predict greater like-
lihood of post-operative delirium include pre-operative dementia and
cognitive impairment, presence of multiple co-morbidities, use of psy-
choactive medications. This study aimed: 1. To determine the relationship
between pre-operative level of cognition and post-operative delirium in
hip fracture patients; 2. To explore whether gender affects this
relationship.
Methods: A retrospective, cross-sectional analysis was carried out on
sequential patients with acute hip fracture attending a district general
hospital between January 2019 and December 2019. Data was manually
extracted from anonymized electronic health records. The 10 point
Abbreviated mental test score (AMTS) was used to measure
pre-operative cognitive function and the 4-point abbreviated test looking
S239
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
at cognition, attention span, alertness and acute fluctuation in mental
function (4-AT) delirium screening tool was used to screen for post-
operative delirium. SPSS 27 software package was used for statistical
analysis. Descriptive statistics were used to analyse baseline patient char-
acteristics and spearman correlation co-efficient and linear regression
analysis were used to measure correlation between pre-operative AMTS
and post-operative levels of 4-AT.
Results: 310 patients 60 years and over were analysed - 83 males and 227
females. Mean age was 82.2 y ±8.48. There was a statistically significant
negative correlation between pre-operative AMTS and post-operative 4-
AT (r=-0.510; p<0.001). This effect persisted when gender was taken into
account but was stronger in females than in males (r=-0.687; p<0.001)
and (r=-0.260; p=0.02) respectively.
Conclusion: Pre-operative cognitive functioning negatively predicts
post-operative delirium in elderly hip fracture patients. This effect is more
marked in elderly hip fracture women than in the men.
P422
ESTABLISHMENT AND CHARACTERIZATION OF A
PARATHYROID STEM CELL LINE
F. Miglietta1, G. Palmini1, F. Giusti1, S. Donati1, C. Aurilia1, L.
Iamartino1, R. Zonefrati2, G. Perigli3, T. Iantomasi1, M. L. Brandi2
1Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences Mario Serio,
University of Study of Florence, 2Fondazione Italiana Ricerca sulle
Malattie dell'Osso, FIRMO Onlus, 3Center of Oncological Minimally
Invasive Surgery, Dept. of Surgery & Translational Medicine,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy
Objective: To establish of an in vitro model of parathyroid stem cell line.
Methods: Sporadic parathyroid adenoma (PA) samples were collected at
the Azienda Ospedaliera Università di Careggi, Florence, with informed
consent approved by the local Ethical Committee. The subpopulations of
parathyroid stem cells (PT-SCs) have been isolated from PA samples with
the sphere-formation assay1. The stem cell phenotype was assessed by
cellular assays/staining, by immunofluorescence analysis, and by analyz-
ing the expression of embryonic stem cell (ESC) and parathyroid (PT)
marker genes.
Results: From each sample collected, we have isolated and established
three PT-SCs lines, called as PT351-/PT355- and PT374-SCs. The stem
cell phenotype of PT-SCs lines was confirmed by evaluating the cells
capacity to differentiate into osteoblasts and into adipocytes. We have
also detected the expression of ESCs marker genes (i.e., POU5F1,
Nanog, KLF4 and SOX2), of PT stem cell marker genes (i.e., CD117,
GCM2, SALL4 and PPAR ), and we have detected the expression of
CaSR and PTH, which are both recognized as PT marker genes. We have
observed the protein expression of mesenchymal stem cell markers, and
of FIL-A, PTH and CaSR by immunofluorescence assays. Our analyses
have confirmed the parathyroid stem cell genotype of PT-SCs lines.
Conclusion: We have completely characterized and studied three PT-
SCs lines at cellular and molecular level. Nowadays, we are also evalu-
ating the expression levels of genes which are involved into parathyroid
glands organogenesis (i.e., PAX1, Tbx1, Sox3, BMP4) and we are per-
forming several analyses to investigate how these established cell lines
respond to different calcium concentrations in terms of PTH release.
Reference: 1. Palmini G, et al. J Vis Exp 2016;116:58334.
Acknowledgement: Supported by Fondazione Italiana Ricerca sulle
Malattie dell'Osso, F.I.R.M.O Onlus, Florence, Italy
P423
EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCK WAVE THERAPY FOR PAIN
CAUSED BY ARTHROSIS OF THE HIP JOINT
E. Guryanova1, S. Lezhenina1, A. Lammert2, D. Guryanov1, V.
Lysenko1, D. Belyakov1, E. Rakovich1
1Chuvash State University by I.N. Ulianov, Cheboksary, Russia, 2St.
Elizabeth University of Health and Social Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia
Objective: Extracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESWT) plays an irre-
placeable role in pain relief due to the hyperstimulation of nerve endings.
The signals generated by the shock wave are sent to the gray matter of the
spinal cord and help to reduce the feeling of pain by increasing impulses
in the thick myelin fibers, which causes a decrease in the sensitivity of
nerve endings. This study aimed to study the efficacy of ESWT for pain in
hip arthrosis.
Methods: The study involved 69 patients aged 45-71 y (mean age 49.6
±6.8 y) with arthrosis of the hip joint, stages 3-4 (confirmed radiograph-
ically for at least 3 months), and with the severity of pain according to the
visual analogue scale (VAS) 6.1±0.6. All individuals received 10 ESWT
procedures every other day for 20 d on the hip joint, as well as trigger
zones in the quadriceps femoris muscle, gluteal muscles. For the proce-
dure, we used KIMATUR 500 (Germany) with a frequency of up to 22
Hz, an effective pressure of up to 5 bar, an energy flux density of up to
0.68 mJ/mm2, for one session up to 5000 strokes. The patients’ assess-
ments of the intensity of their pain syndrome were determined by the
VAS at the beginning and at the end of the treatment and one month after
its completion. The Roland-Morris scale was used to determine the de-
gree of impairment.
Results: ESWT leads to a decrease in pain, according to the VAS, already
in the second week of treatment. After 5 ESWT sessions, pain decreases
according to the VAS by more than 1 point. Further ESWT sessions led to
a decrease in the intensity of the pain syndrome on average to 3.1±0.4
points. One month after completion of treatment, the intensity of pain did
not differ from the VAS parameters immediately after completion of the
ESWT course (according to the Roland-Morris scale after treatment - 3.2
±1.4; p<0.05). There was a decrease in joint pain on palpation (from 3.56
±0.21 to 2.24±0.33 points, p<0.05) and joint circumference (from 41.11
±3.38 to 40.05±3, 21 cm, p<0.05).
Conclusion: ESWT is a significant alternative in the treatment of hip
arthrosis pain. It is important to note the typically high tolerance of the
procedure and its general level of safety, which is its significant advantage
over the traditionally used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In the
presence of contraindications to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
the role of ESWT in the conservative treatment of pain syndrome is
irreplaceable.
P424
BACK PAIN AFTER SUFFERING FROM COVID-19
PNEUMONIA
E. Deomidov1, E. Guryanova1
1Chuvash State University by I.N. Ulianov, Cheboksary, Russia
Objective: To study the effect of rubbing and kneading techniques for
their differentiated use in the massage procedure in patients with various
manifestations of dorsalgia in patients who have had pneumonia caused
by COVID-19.
Methods: The study included 40 patients aged 50-60 y (23 women, 17
men) with dorsalgia syndrome with muscular-tonic, neurodystrophic and
neurovascular manifestations. Patients were admitted for treatment no
earlier than 2 months after pneumonia. The patients were randomized
into 2 groups. Group 1 received massage procedures for the neck area
and chest with the predominant use of rubbing techniques of classical
massage. Group 2 received massage sessions of the same zones with
the predominant use of kneading and vibration techniques. The duration
of one procedure is 25-30 min, for a course of treatment 10 procedures.
Patients underwent an assessment of hemodynamic parameters (heart
rate, blood pressure), rheovasography (RVG). The severity of pain was
assessed by the VAS. The studies were carried out before and after the
course of treatment and once during the second or third massage proce-
dure. In the statistical analysis of the results obtained, the nonparametric
Wilcoxon test was used (the differences are significant at p≤0.05).
Results: At admission, the patients had complaints of chest pain of vary-
ing intensity and character (according to VAS 4.3±0.4 points), dyspnea
S240
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
according to the MRS scale averaged 1.9±0.2. The patients showed lim-
ited movement in the thoracic spine. Examination revealed the smooth-
ness of the cervical lordosis, tension of the paravertebral muscles, tender-
ness on palpation of the sternum. In 10% of patients, neurovascular dis-
orders were observed in the form of pastiness, pallor, cyanosis of the skin
in the chest area. Rheographic studies revealed changes in peripheral
circulation in the form of a decrease in blood flow intensity, a patholog-
ical shape of the curve, indicating a decrease in blood filling, an increase
in tone and a decrease in the elasticity of peripheral vessels in the upper
extremities. All patients tolerated massage procedures well, noting a de-
crease in pain intensity (according to VAS from 4 to 3 points) even after
one session. Patients subjectively perceived the techniques from the rub-
bing group as an energetic effect, while the appearance of a more pro-
nounced sensation of warmth and a surge of strength was noted than
when using kneading techniques. Both methods had no significant effect
on heart rate. It was revealed that the techniques of the group of rubbing,
in contrast to the techniques of kneading, significantly increased the value
of blood pressure (p≤0.01). According to RVG data, massage with
kneading techniques in combination with vibration caused a significant
increase in the intensity of blood circulation in the limb according to the
rheographic index. In the group of patients who underwent kneading and
massage, the intensity of back pain according to the VAS decreased to 2.4
±0.3, dyspnea according to the MRS scale was 0.8±0.09.
Conclusion: Massage with kneading and vibration techniques had a pre-
dominant effect on the neuromuscular apparatus and peripheral
circulation.
P425
P R O T E C T I N G
J O I N T S
A N D
B O N E
D U R I N G
INFLAMMATION: THE ROLE OF THE CALCITONIN
RECEPTOR IN COLLAGEN ANTIBODY-INDUCED
ARTHRITIS
T. Maleitzke1, A. Hildebrandt2, T. Dietrich2, T. Weber2, J. Appelt3, D.
Jahn3, D. Zocholl4, A. Baranowsky5, G. N. Duda3, S. Tsitsilonis1, J.
Keller5
1Berlin Institute of Health at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
2Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 3Berlin Institute of Health
at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Julius Wolff Institute, Berlin,
4Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Biometry and Clinical
Epidemiology, Berlin, 5University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Dept. of Trauma & Orthopedic Surgery, Hamburg, Germany
Objective: Calcitonin (CT) has been characterized as a chondroprotective
and bone sparing hormone. While pharmacological CT derived from
salmon or eel has been used to treat compromised bone mass in osteopo-
rosis, osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), data on endogenous
CT signalling in RA is scarce. As CT exerts its physiological effects
through the calcitonin receptor (CTR), we exposed CTR-deficient
(Calcr-/-) and wildtype (WT) mice to antibody-mediated arthritis and
assessed joint inflammation and chondro-osseus remodeling.
Methods: Collagen II-antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) was induced
and boosted with lipopolysaccharide in WT and Calcr-/- mice, while con-
trol (CTRL) animals received phosphate-buffered saline. Animals were
monitored daily over the course of 10 and 48 d employing the semiquan-
titative arthritis score. Joint inflammation, cartilage degradation, and bone
integrity were assessed by histology, immunohistochemistry, gene ex-
pression analysis, and μCT.
Results: Arthritis was accompanied by systemic CT release and the CTR
was abundantly expressed in the articular cartilage surface of WT CTRL
and WT CAIA animals. Calcr-/- CAIA and WT CAIA mice developed
severe arthritic phenotypes. Compared to WT CAIA animals, Calcr-/-
CAIA mice demonstrated higher histological inflammation and cartilage
degradation scores, accompanied by radiologically evident systemic bone
loss and increased expression of markers for inflammation (Sphk, Il1b,
Tgfb, Ccl2), immunomodulation (Cd14, Cd68), bone resorption (Acp5,
Ctsk) and cartilage degradation (Mmp13), as well as suppressed collagen
formation markers (Col1a1, Col2a1).
Conclusion: While pharmacological CT has been used to treat osteopo-
rosis and bone erosions in RA, we hereby demonstrate for the first time
the pivotal role of endogenous CTR signalling in experimental RA, to
contain inflammation and maintain and restore bone integrity.
P426
BONE HEALTH IN PATIENTS WITH MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS:
ANALYSIS OF BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND 3D-
RECONSTRUCTION OF PROXIMAL FEMUR BY DXA
M. R. Ulla1, C. Vrech2, L. R. Brun3, M. L. Brance3, E. Peralta Lopez4, M.
J. Castro1, F. Martos1, S. Mazzini4, M. A. Rivoira4
1Fundación ILAIM, Córdoba, 2Sanatorio Allende, Córdoba, 3CONICET
- Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, UNR, Rosario, 4Facultad de Ciencias
Médicas, UNC, Córdoba, Argentina
Objective: Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) is an autoim-
mune demyelinating disease affecting 17-18/100000 Argentinians.
Corticosteroid treatment increase bone-damaging and the rate of falls
and fractures. The aim of our study was to evaluate bone health through
bone mineral metabolism and BMD in RRMS-patients compared to
healthy controls.
Methods: Observational, prospective and open study in 40 RRMS-
patients aged 16-59 y and 40 matched controls (C). Serum levels of
calcium, ionic calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, alkaline phosphatase,
PTH, osteocalcin, β-CrossLaps and 25(OH)vitamin D were evaluated.
BMD (g/cm2) was measured by DXA on lumbar spine (LS), femoral neck
(FN) and total hip (TH). 3D analysis was performed with 3D-Shaper
software (Galgo Medical, Spain). A survey of physical activity, sun ex-
posure and daily consumption was carried out. Shapiro-Wilk test and
parametric or nonparametric tests were used. Data were expressed as
mean±SD; p<0.05 was considered significant.
Results: No differences in BMD was observed between RRMS and C in
all areas analyzed (LS: C 0.998±0.141 vs. RRMS 0.986±0.119, p>0.05;
FN: C 0.817±0.123 vs. RRMS 0.794±0.140, p>0.05; TH: C 0.926±0.127
vs. RRMS 0.908±0.131, p>0.05). In addition, the 3D analysis of the hip
showed no differences: sDens (mg/cm2): C 161.8±22.2 vs. RRMS 161.0
±24.3 p>0.05; trab vBMD (mg/cm3): C 206.7±42.3 vs. RRMS 203.5
±44.5 p>0.05). Patients with RRMS had lower serum levels of
25(OH)vitamin D and alkaline phosphatase (21.1±7.8 vs. 38.3±14.8
ng/ml and 84.6±36.9 vs. 136.3±51.7 U/L, p<0.001, respectively).
RRMS-patients performed more physical activity (1.50±0.04 vs. 0.81
±0.05 h/d, p<0.05). Daily consumption was low in both groups
(500 mg Ca/d) and 70% of RRMS patients had inadequate sun exposure.
Conclusion: Lower vitamin D and alkaline phosphatase did not translate
into lower BMD, partially due to greater physical activity in RRMS-
patients.
P427
VERTEBRAL FRACTURES AND OSTEOPOROSIS FOLLOW-
UP IN PATIENTS THAT UNDERWENT HIP FRAGILITY
FRACTURE AT THE MEXICO NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
REHABILITATION IN 2018
R. Pérez-Saldaña1, R. Coronado-Zarco1, A. Olascoaga-Gómez de León1,
D. D. Chávez-Arias1
1Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: To determine the presence of vertebral fractures and osteopo-
rosis follow-up in patients that underwent surgery for a hip fragility frac-
ture in 2018 at Mexico National Institute of Rehabilitation.
Methods: A descriptive observational cross-sectional study was carried
out, from registers of patients that underwent surgery for a hip fracture
during 2018. Patients over 65 y of age were included if hip fracture was
considered as a fragility fracture. Hospital registries were looked up to
S241
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
identify spine radiographs. A telephone survey was done to update clin-
ical information. Descriptive statistics were performed for all quantitative
variables; statistical inferences were done through chi-squared test, and
correlations through Pearson´s R. Statistical package SPSS 17 was used.
Results: A total of 205 patients were included, 80% female. The average
age was 79.18 (±4.7) y; 184 patients were alive after a year of the incident
fracture; 63.5% started on a pharmacologic treatment for osteoporosis.
The most prevalent comorbidities were systemic arterial hypertension in
43%, diabetes in 30.24%. Mortality at 6 months after surgical treatment
was 10.24% (only renal chronic insufficiency correlated p=0.003). Only
45.83% of patients had spine radiographs, from which vertebral fractures
were present in 46%. The most frequent levels of involvement were T12
and L1.
Conclusion: Vertebral fractures had been previously reported in hip frac-
ture patients with high prevalence. The lack of intentional search for this
fractures condition undiagnosis, which delay the comprehensive and
timely treatment of osteoporosis. In our context, only 45.83% of hip
fractures were assessed for vertebral fractures. This results might show
a lack of knowledge or adherence to clinical practice guidelines recom-
mendations, and suggest the need to establish a secondary prevention
program.
P428
FREQUENCY OF OSTEOPOROTIC HIP FRACTURE IN AN
ALGERIAN HOSPITAL
H. H. Hafirassou1, M. F. Farida1, N. Z. Newel1, M. C. Dahou-Makhluofi1
1Mohamed Lamine Debaghrine Hospital, Alger, Algeria
Objective: The hip fracture is the most serious complication of osteopo-
rosis. It is a public health issue in elderly because of its frequency, severity
and economic impact. We report the result of an 24 months investigation
(May 2019-April2021). The aim of this study was to determine the fre-
quency of osteoporotic hip fractures and identify the risk factors of oste-
oporosis and falls leading to these fractures.
Methods: Cross-sectional, prospective, descriptive study. Patients with
spontaneous or secondary low trauma hip fractures during 24 months
were included. Have been collected: patient characteristics, risk factors
for osteoporosis and falls, type of treatment and length of hospital stay.
Results: 115 cases of hip fractures were recorded. We noted a female
predominance (60%) with a sex ratio of 0.60, the average age is 78.65
±11.71 y. The associated comorbidities are cardiovascular (56%), diabe-
tes (32%), dysthyroidism (12%), and chronic renal failure (6%). The
fracture mechanism is dominated by the fall (93%), it is most often a
domestic accident: slipping (30%), stumbling (26%), ablution (11%),
falling on the stairs (7%). The risk factors for osteoporosis identified
are: age >70 y (80%), female sex (60%), low BMI (18%), sedentary
lifestyle (17%), corticosteroid therapy 7%, and smoking (6.3%). The risk
factors of fracture: visual disturbances (40%) neuromuscular disorders in
11, 9%, poor health (more than 3 chronic diseases) in 9% of patients. The
average duration of hospitalization is 5.2±2.5 d. The treatment is surgical
in 81.6%.
Conclusion: Through this study, we found that osteoporotic hip fracture
is frequent. The osteoporosis risk factors identified were female sex,
advanced age, corticosteroid therapy and sedentary lifestyle. Fall risk
factors were dominated by visual disturbances and neuromuscular
disorders.
P429
A C ASE STUD Y ON P REG NANC Y ASSOC IA TED
OSTEOPOROSIS (PAO)
S. M. Dutson1
1Chepstow, UK
Objective: To share my personal experience of PAO in order to raise
awareness of this rare condition and prevent nondiagnosis.
Aims: To give a brief outline of the trauma of PAO, from initial problems
to eventual diagnosis and treatment; To discuss the emotional and phys-
ical difficulties of caring for a baby while having PAO; To flag up specific
symptoms of PAO as possible indicators.
As evidence, I will include my DXA scans which show 4 vertebral wedge
fractures and my bone density measurements, which charts improvements
and changes over 29 years, since the original diagnosis.
This presentation will be relevant not just for anyone interested in this rare
form of osteoporosis, but also professionals involved in working with
postnatal women.
Conclusion: I hope by shining a light on this rare condition, professionals
will be able to identify symptoms of PAO, leading to an early diagnosis
and prompt treatment.
P430
POST-MARKETING SAFETY SURVEILLANCE OF ANTI-
OSTEOARTHRITIS DRUGS: A PROTOCOL FOR A
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF PUBLISHED LITERATURE
G. Honvo1, J.-Y. Reginster1, A. Mobasheri2, L. Lengelé1, B. Avouac3, R.
Rizzoli4, O. Bruyère1
1Division of Public Health, Epidemiology and Health Economics,
University of Liège; WHO Collaborating Centre for Public Health
Aspects of Musculoskeletal Health and Aging, Liège, Belgium,
2Research Unit of Medical Imaging, Physics and Technology, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 3WHO Collaborating
Centre for Public Health Aspects of Musculoskeletal Health and Aging,
Liège, Belgium, 4WHO Collaborating Centre for Public Health Aspects
of Musculoskeletal Health and Aging, Liège, Belgium; Division of Bone
Diseases, Geneva University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine, Geneva,
Switzerland
Recently, the safety of various anti-osteoarthritis medications was
reassessed through systematic reviews and meta-analyses of phase III
randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials (RCT). Despite the impor-
tance of such type of evidence, it remains limited and needs to be
complemented by post-marketing safety surveillance data. The objective
of this systematic literature review is to identify all the published post-
marketing safety surveillance studies on pharmacological treatments in
osteoarthritis (OA) patients, and to describe the characteristics and the
main findings of these studies. The purpose is to provide insights on the
state of post-marketing drug safety surveillance in OA, and to identify
potential challenges in this setting.
This systematic review will be performed according to the methodolog-
ical guidelines provided in the Cochrane handbook for systematic litera-
ture reviews, and will be reported following the PRISMA guidelines. The
following bibliographic databases will be comprehensively searched,
using detailed and highly sensitive search strategies: Medline (via
Ovid), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (Ovid
CENTRAL), Scopus and TOXLINE (via ProQuest). The main outcome
of this research is any adverse event/effect or any safety issue reported in
the included studies. As a systematic review not involving quantitative
synthesis, the retrieved data will only be qualitatively synthetized.
This systematic review is expected to provide an overview of the number
and characteristics (design, number of patients included, duration of fol-
low-up, etc.) of post-marketing safety surveillance studies in OA patients,
as well as on outcomes of these studies. Data from the current study will
help better establishing the safety profile of currently used anti-OA
medications.
The dissemination plan for this systematic literature review includes:
&
A publication in first-line Journal in the field.
&
A presentation during a dedicated session at the WCO 2022 in
Berlin.
&
A wide distribution to the IOF/ESCEO database.
&
A post on the ESCEO website.
S242
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
&
A dissemination to the network of 260+ scientific and patients soci-
eties affiliated to the Committee of National Societies of the
International Osteoporosis Foundation (IOF).
&
An endorsement and a dissemination through the WHO
Collaborating Center for Public Health Aspects of Musculoskeletal
Health and Aging network.
PROSPERO Registration number: CRD42021227872
P431
SCREENING SARCOPENIA THROUGH SARC-F IN
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN: A STUDY FROM A GREEK
SEMI-MOUNTAINOUS MUNICIPALITY
M. Tsekoura1, A. Sofia2, S. Andreadou3, M. Moucho1, A. Paskou1, J.
Gliatis4, E. Billis1
1Dept. of Physiotherapy, School of Health Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Patras, Aigio, 2Pscachna General Practice Health Center,
Evia, 3General Hospital of Chalkida, Evia, 4Dept. of Medicine, School of
Health Sciences, University of Patras, Patras, Greece
Objective: Sarcopenia is a frequent, age-related muscle wasting, which
requires proper screening and diagnosis. SARC-F has been proposed by
EWGSOP2 as a screening tool to identify patients at risk of sarcopenia.
Patients with sarcopenia are associated with several adverse outcomes
and careful planning of the intervention strategies is important. The aim
of this study is to explore the presence of sarcopenia through the use of
the SARC-F in a Greek sample of postmenopausal women living in a
broad semi-mountainous municipality across Greek mainland.
Methods: Consecutive women (154) visiting the Primary Healthcare
Centers of Dirfιes – Messapies, Evia, Greece between May and
July 2020 were invited to participate in this cross-sectional study.
Eligible women had to be over 60 years old and sign an informed consent
form for the study. The risk of sarcopenia was determined through the
Greek SARC-F questionnaire; where a score ≥4 is considered of high risk
for having sarcopenia. A self-administered questionnaire, containing
medical history and demographic data was also given to all participants.
In addition, T-scores were obtained from heel scans using a Sahara Bone
Sonometer. A logistic regression analysis was used in order to test its
associated factors.
Results: The sample comprised 154 postmenopausal women with an
average age of 69.4±7 y. The prevalence of women at high risk of sarco-
penia was 22.1% (n=34). The findings of this study demonstrated that
postmenopausal women with high risk of sarcopenia was positively as-
sociated with age (0.01-0.04; p<0.001), T-score (0.04-0.08; p=0.02),
number of falls (0.00-0.18; p=0.04), BMI (0.00-0.25; p=0.02) and num-
ber of births (0.00-0.25; p=0.05).
Conclusion: The percentage rate of postmenopausal women at high risk
of sarcopenia was 22.1%. More research is needed in order to clarify the
precise association of specific characteristics of postmenopausal women
with high risk of sarcopenia and other factors. The results highlight the
importance of early detection of sarcopenia in postmenopausal women in
order to develop effective preventive and intervention programmes.
P432
USING SOCIAL MEDIA AS A PATIENT EDUCATION TOOL: IS
THERE A ROOM FOR BONE HEALTH EDUCATIONAL HUB?
Y. El Miedany1, M. El Gaafary2, S. Galal3, N. Fouad4, M. Hassan5
1Canterbury Christ Church University, Kent, UK, 2Community & Public
Health Ain Shams university, Cairo, Egypt, 3Rheumatology, Physical
Medicine & Rehabilitation, Ain Shams university, Cairo, Egypt,
4Rheumatology & Rehabilitation, Fayoum University, Fayoum, Egypt,
5Rheumatology & Rehabilitation Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt
Objective: Social media not only has applications for teaching and learn-
ing, but also has the potential to allow the patients to communicate,
collaborate and share information. Over the past year, and as a
consequence to the COVID-19 pandemic, social media has become an
integral communication method for the majority of our digitally connect-
ed society These offer tips, strategies and health services benefits for
people concerned about or living with variable medical conditions. The
information can also be of value for people who are caring for others or
just looking into symptoms. This study aimed to assess the value of social
media as social osteoporosis hub to support people and patient commu-
nities, provide updates on osteoporosis management and fracture preven-
tion, available services, as well as combat misconceptions.
Methods: The Egyptian Academy of bone health and metabolic bone
disease launched a social hub for bone health and fracture prevention
patient education through online patient communication. This included
different forms: video presentations, Wikis (online public forum featuring
text and multimedia content that can be edited by users), microblogs
(format which allows users to post a large number of brief messages or
updates over a short period). The people perception toward the use of
social media in bone health patient education was evaluated by analyzing
the people interaction and their responses reflecting their attitude toward
its benefits and risks involved.
Results: Two education videos and 3 educational posts were published in
2 community groups. Two Wikis and 12 microblogs were also launched
on 2 Facebook pages. These sites have wide range of accessibility with
34,230 persons having access to pages. The osteoporosis microblogs and
Wikis were liked by 3491 (10.2% of the community group population).
The video recorded educational material were viewed by 1672 persons
(4.88% of the accessible persons), 484 persons reacted to the educational
work (28.95% of viewed persons), 27 positive comments or queries were
received (1.61% of viewed persons), the posts and videos were shared by
55 persons (3.29% of viewed persons). One post was shared internation-
ally by 3 international osteoporosis societies in other countries.
Conclusion: The results of this work indicate that social media can be a
useful tool for patient education in bone health and fracture prevention. It
is important to leverage social healthcare marketing platforms to educate
the people, answer their queries and update them on matters related to
their health conditions. People communities are likely using one or more
social media tools to share information and discuss their health. Asserting
the society’s expertise has helped to protect people from faulty informa-
tion. Interactive digital communication has a role in optimizing patients’
health.
P433
HOW TO INITIATE AND DEVELOP FRACTURE LIAISON
S E R V I C E S :
E X P E R I E N C E
F R O M
B R A Z I L
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE IOF CAPTURE THE
FRACTURE® FLS MENTORS IN BRAZIL
B. Stolnicki1, A. M. Inacio2, K. K. Tutiya3, L. F. T. Vieira4, M. Caló5, M.
K. Javaid6
1PREVREFRAT, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2OSTI, Curitiba, Brazil,
3Hospital Sancta María Maggiore, São Paulo, Brazil, 4Revita, Porto
Velho, Brazil, 5IOF Latin America, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
6University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Objective: IOF has developed a mentorship program to enable the im-
plementation of Post-Fracture Care (PFC) coordination programs, such as
Fracture Liaison Services (FLSs) worldwide. The program exchanges
knowledge and skills by connecting experienced PFC program cham-
pions with any institutions willing to establish new FLS and improve
the qualification of existing ones. The aim is to demonstrate the results
obtained after one year of program and some recommendations on how to
implement and improve the qualification of FLSs in Brazil.
Methods: The mentorship learning objectives included general principles
of FLS, Quality Improvement and adult learning. A multidisciplinary
team of mentors were selected from orthopedics and geriatrics by their
experience in FLS. Before the online sessions, each mentor completed a
needs assessment. Five online interactive webinars covered the learning
S243
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
objectives and allowed the mentors to improve their training skills.
Simultaneous translation was provided for the sessions with presentation
in Portuguese. This was followed by monthly action meetings to support
the mentors to create new FLS and improve others already existing in one
year of the IOF Capture the Fracture® FLS Mentors in Brazil work.
Results: The premeeting assessment identified gaps including how many
patients an FLS should expect to identify as well as variability in disci-
plines involved in the FLS. The ability to network was a high priority.
The content, interactivity, technical support and communication were
highly rated by the mentors. All the mentors completed the training with
100% attendance. After one year of operation the IOF Capture the
Fracture FLS Mentors in Brazil helped to create and to implement 8
new FLS and actively participated in the improvement of 12 FLSs in their
position on the Capture the Fracture Best Practices Map. Currently, Brazil
has 40 FLSs on the Map of Best Practices, 6 gold, 8 silver, 7 bronze, 12
blue and 7 green stars.
Conclusion: The IOF Capture the Fracture FLS Mentorship program has
been successfully implemented in Brazil and already led to FLSs getting
started and becoming more effective. Future work is focused on improv-
ing the policy environment for FLS and providing resources and tools in
local languages.
P434
EVALUATION OF BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND BONE
TURNOVER MARKERS IN PATIENTS WITH ANKYLOSING
SPONDYLITIS
N. Sahin1, E. Ozcan2, M. Ozkaya3, S. Erkan4, B. Omer5
1Balikesir University, Faculty of Medicine, Physical Therapy &
Rehabilitation Dept., Balikesir, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of
Medicine, Physical Therapy & Rehabilitation Dept., Istanbul, 3Bagcilar
Hospital, Physical Therapy & Rehabilitation Dept., Istanbul, 4Special
Biochemistry Clinic, Istanbul, 5Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of
Medicine, Biochemistry Dept., Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a complex, potentially debil-
itating disease that is insidious in onset, progressing to deformity in spine
over several years. Men are more often affected than women.
Osteoporosis and vertebral fractures are now well recognized features in
patients with advanced AS. The aim of this study was to compare BMD
of lateral lumbar spine and hip in male patients with AS and control
group.
Methods: 27 consecutive AS patients with a mean disease duration of 9.9
y and 23 age, height and weight-matched healthy controls were recruited
for the study. The mean age of the AS patients was 39.31±12.13 and the
mean age of the control group was 40.90±8.41. In both patients and
control groups, BMD was evaluated for the lumbar spine and hip.
Serum osteocalcin and urinary N-telopeptide (NTx) were measured as
bone turnover markers in both patient and control groups.
Results: Osteoporosis was detected 1(4.3%) of control group and in
5(18.5%) of AS patients. The femoral neck and femur total T-scores,
lateral lumbar 3 T-score values were significantly lower in AS patients
compared with the control group (p=0.035 and p=0.03, p=0.001, succes-
sively). Osteocalcin and NTx levels were significantly higher in patients
with AS compared with the control group (p<0.05).
Conclusion: The incidence of osteoporosis is high in AS patients com-
pare control group. The monitoring of bone turnover markers may help to
prognostic of development osteoporosis in AS patients. The risk of ver-
tebral fractures can increase in AS patients with osteoporosis. The frac-
tures of AS patients are atypic that may be caused morbidity and in some
case mortality. The patients with AS must be assessed for osteoporosis
and must be treated for osteoporosis, so severe complications such as
fractures can be prevented in AS.
P435
QUALITY OF LIFE FOLLOWING ONE YEAR OF SUSTAINING
HIP FRACTURE
K. X. L. Law1, J. F. Leong1, S. T. Ooi1, D. G. R. Rao1, N. S. Z. Abidin1,
L. K. Belani1, S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic and Traumatology Dept.,
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Objective: Living in an ageing country like Malaysia, higher incidence of
elderly with osteoporosis are prone to sustaining hip fractures. The ability
to be mobile and selfcare is important to them so as to ensure a good
quality of living towards the final decades of life. Hip fractures may lead
to detrimental effects to physical health of elderly patients which in turn
results in disability and death. Hence, we aim to study health-related
quality of life (HRQoL) and ambulatory status following hip fractures.
Methods: A cross-sectional study conducted among patients aged 60
years and older with osteoporotic hip fracture from 2018-2020 in
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Malaysia. Patient reported HRQoL
(5Q-5D-5L) was collected from patients upon discharge at 6 months and
12 months. Demographics, clinical data and ambulatory status was
followed up and recorded.
Results: A total of 139 patients (99 females, 40 males) with mean age of
77.8 y (±8.0) were identified. Majority was of Chinese ethnicity (64.0%)
and 46% of patients underwent hip surgery. The EQDL index increased
from 0.19±0.37 to 0.48±0.32 at 6 months follow up and 0.57±0.35 at 12
months follow up. The mean EQ VAS score (perception of overall health)
increased from 46.4±13.8 to 59.4±13.3 at 6 months and 65.5±15.7 at 12
months. Factors potentially associated with HRQoL at 12 months are the
prefracture ambulatory status and surgery performed. Patients who re-
ceived surgery reported to have lesser problems at all follow-ups,
p<0.001 and p=0.001, respectively. 79.7% patients who underwent sur-
gery were able to ambulate without requiring wheelchair at 6 months,
while in nonoperative group there were only 37.3%. 29.7% of patients
were ambulating independently at 12 months after surgery as compared to
only 12.0% in those without surgery. 82% of the patients who had surgery
returned to their prefracture ambulatory status at 12 months while 55.0%
returned to their prefracture ambulation in nonoperative group.
Conclusion: Hip fracture has incurred a tremendous impact to one’s life.
Despite HRQoL improved over a period of 12 months, it did not fully
return to prefracture state. Our study has shown that surgery may play a
major role in returning a better quality of life following a hip fracture.
P436
PSYCHOLOGICAL STATUS OF PATIENTS SUFFERING
FROM SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS DEPENDING ON ACTIVITY,
DURATION OF THE DISEASE AND AGE OF THE PATIENTS
R. Grekhov1
1Zborovsky' Research Institute for Clinical & Experimental
Rheumatology, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: To study the correlations between some features of psycho-
logical status of systemic sclerosis (SS) patients and clinical variants of
the disease.
Methods: There were 70 patients suffered from SS according to 2013
ACR/EULAR classification criteria. The patients were represented by
women (94%) of average age=38±3.3 y with average disease dura-
tion=14±2.6 y. To carry out the psychological examination we used the
method for the formalized assessment of neurotic manifestations (L.L.
Dmitrieva, 1990) [1], developed on the basis of the MMPI questions bank
in the Bekhterev’s Psychoneurological Institute. The questionnaire con-
sists of 39 statements that contain such signs of neurotic conditions as
fatigue, sleep disturbances, hypochondriac fixation on unpleasant somatic
S244
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
sensations, decreased mood, increased irritability, fears, anxiety, and
selfdoubt. There are four scales: anxiety, depression, asthenia, and hypo-
chondria, which are ranked according to a 10-point scale.
Results: The presence of neurotic disturbances was revealed in SS patients:
the increase of anxiety (6.63±0.25 points), hypochondria (6.31±0.26) and
asthenia (6.36±0.28 points) scales. Depression variated in the subclinical
range (4.98±0.2). The main clinical manifestations of neurotic disorders
were fatigue, emotional instability, anxiety and depressed mood.Particular
attention was paid to the following clinical features of SS: degree of activity
of the pathological process, duration of the disease, and age of the patients.
In patients with 2nd degree of activity, there was a significant increase of
the depression scores. In patients with the 3rd degree of disease activity,
depression, asthenia and hypochondria come to be increased (p<0.05).
Correlation analysis showed the direct moderate relationship between SS
activity and the severity of asthenia, depression and anxiety. In patients with
a disease duration of 5-10 y, a significant increase (p<0.01) of asthenia and
depression scores was noted. A subsequent increase in the duration of the
disease was accompanied by a significant increase in the average values of
the scales of depression, anxiety and hypochondria (p<0.05). The correla-
tion analysis indicates direct moderate relationship between the neurotic
symptoms and SS duration. Also, the increase of hypochondria score
showed direct correlation with age of SS patients. Thus, according the
results of correlation analysis, one of the factors predisposing to the devel-
opment of neurotic disorders in SS are the activity of the disease itself, the
duration of the disease, and the age of the patients.
Conclusion: The data we obtained indicate that some features of the
clinical condition are directly related to the development of neurotic
symptoms of the disease, which can lead to the appearance of negative
psychosocial consequences of the disease and, therefore, complicate the
process of patient adaptation and making the coping process more diffi-
cult. The importance of assessment of the SS patients’ emotional state
should be recognized, it is necessary to take into account the patients’
beliefs, their perception of the existing disease and related problems. If the
psychosocial problems of patients are not adequately solved, this can lead
to a decrease in compliance and to a decrease in the effectiveness of the
therapy.
Reference: 1. Dmitrieva LL. Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova
1990;90:77.
P437
ADHERENCE TO ANTIOSTEOPOROTIC MEDICATION
AFTER ONE YEAR FOLLOW-UP WITH FRACTURE
LIAISON SERVICE IN TERTIARY UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL,
MALAYSIA
J. F. Leong1, K. X. L. Law1, D. G. R. Rao1, S. T. Ooi1, N. S. Z. Abidin1,
L. K. Belani1, M. K. Yin2, S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic & Traumatology Dept., Hospital
Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, 2Dept. of Pharmacy, Hospital Canselor Tuanku
Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Objective: Adherence to medication for osteoporotic patients and those
who are high risk of refracture has become a challenge as patients are
required to take for long term. Fracture Liaison Service (FLS) which is a
multidisciplinary approach has been implemented to ensure osteoporotic
patients are on treatment and comply to their medications. Our objective
is to investigate the compliance of antiosteoporosis medication, calcium
and vitamin D supplementation among patients who are under our FLS.
Methods: Patients under the follow-up of Fracture Liaison Service from
May 2019 to May 2020 taking their anti-osteoporotic medication such as
bisphosphonate, denosumab, teriparatide and supplement of calcium and
vitamin D were identified. Compliance on medication were evaluated
after one year starting medication.
Results: A total of 139 patients were identified. After a year initiating
antiosteoporotic treatment, 121 (87%) patients still comply taking their
antiosteoporotic medication and 18 (13%) stopped taking the medication.
Meanwhile, 127 (91%) patients continued taking both calcium supple-
ment and vitamin D. Patients taking denosumab (85%) have shown better
compliance of continuing their medication compared with those taking
bisphosphonate (71%) and teriparatide (80%) after one year. The com-
mon reason for not continuing the medication was attributed to financial
difficulties buying their medication, not necessary to take it because they
feel well, transportation problem to collect medicine, loss to follow-up,
doctor’s decision to stop medication and too many medications to take
everyday.
Conclusion: Patient education is the most important factor to make sure
they comply with their treatment. Financial support and reduction in price
of anti-osteoporotic mediation to make it affordable for patients will also
increase the likelihood of patients to continue with their medication.
P438
INVESTIGATING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BMI AND
BMD AS A POTENTIAL MEDIATOR TOWARDS FRACTURE
RISK PREDICTION
S. T. Ooi1, J. F. Leong1, D. G. R. Rao1, K. X. L. Law1, N. S. Z. Abidin1,
L. K. Belani1, S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic & Traumatology Dept., Hospital
Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Objective: Decreased BMD and low BMI have long been known as
significant predictors for fractures. In fact, the WHO-developed fracture
risk assessment tool (FRAX) uses femoral neck BMD and BMI as input
values to assess a person’s 10-year probability of having a fracture.
However, BMD and BMI are usually seen as independent predictors of
a person’s fracture risk, but several studies have indicated potential cor-
relation between BMD and BMI. There have been speculations of a
variety of factors such as fatty tissue deposition and bone adaptive re-
modeling, that cause persons with higher BMI to benefit from higher
BMD and hence reduced fracture risk, although the exact mechanisms
are not fully understood. Conversely, persons with lower BMI may suffer
from the cascading effects of having lower BMD, and having less fatty
deposits to protect from external impact. Hence, it is important to deter-
mine the possible relationship between BMI and BMD given the mutu-
ally reinforcing effects between these 2 variables.
Methods: For the purpose of this study, BMI and BMD data from 52
patients who were admitted to our Orthopedic department was collected.
These patients had an average age of 74.5 y, and 50% of them were
admitted due to hip-related fractures. Comprehensive BMD scans were
performed, with the associated t-scores (measured in SD) being collected
across hip and spine regions.
Results: Spearman rank-order correlation between BMI and BMD across
different BMD components showed significant positive linear relation-
ship between BMI and BMD components such as in the femur region
[neck (r=0.339, p=0.013), trochanteric (r=0.381, p=0.005),
intertrochanteric (r=0.358, p=0.009), total hip (r=0.367, p=0.007) and
ward (r=0.344, p=0.012) and in the spine region L2 (r=0.321, p=0.019)
and L3 (r=0.286, p=0.038)].
Conclusion: These results indicate strongly that persons with higher BMI
are likely to have higher BMD values, thereby receiving additional pro-
tection from potential fractures.
P439
APPLICATION OF FRAX SCORE AND COMORBID HISTORY
IN PREDICTING FRACTURES
D. G. R. Rao1, J. F. Leong1, S. T. Ooi1, K. X. L. Law1, N. S. Z. Abidin1,
L. K. Belani1, S. A. Mokhtar1
1Fracture Liaison Service, Orthopaedic and Traumatology Dept.,
Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
S245
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: The FRAX is a tool that’s used to evaluate the risk of fracture
in patients. FRAX takes into consideration certain patients’ history to
calculate the score. However, FRAX does not take into consideration
common diseases such as type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and
dyslipidemia which have been found to be associated with fractures. In
addition to that, medications associated with the diseases stated above
have been associated with both an increase and decrease in fracture risk.
Methods: 82 patients aged above 50 years old who were admitted to the
Orthopedic wards in Hospital Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia for either
osteoporotic or low-trauma fractures, or admitted for other diagnoses
were taken for this study. Those admitted for other diagnoses must not
have had a previous osteoporotic or low trauma fracture. The patient’s
age, gender, race, FRAX scores (without BMD), comorbid history and
history of medications were recorded.
Results: There was a significant correlation between the major osteopo-
rotic (rs=-0.393, n=66, p<0.05) and hip (rs=-0.374, n=66, p<0.05) FRAX
score, and the fracture status of the patient. The mean of the FRAX score
for both major osteoporotic and hip fracture were higher in those with
fractures (20.80; 10.99) compared to those without (10.80; 4.36).
However, there was no significant correlation between comorbid history
and medication history, and fracture status.
Conclusion: The FRAX score can be used to predict the risk of secondary
fracture. Contrary to researches that state type 2 diabetes mellitus, hyperten-
sion, dyslipidemia, and associated medicines are associated with fractures;
this study discovered that there was no significant relationship between them
and fracture status. This could be due to the fact that this study did not
capture the duration of the comorbid and medications taken by the patients.
P440
RISK FACTORS ASSESSMENT OF PATIENTS OPERATED
FOR OSTEOPOROTIC HIP FRACTURE
M. Baklaci1, Y. Kirazli1, E. Cinar1, K. Aktuglu2, N. Ozkayin2, I. Tamsel3
1Ege University School of Medicine, Dept. of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, 2Ege University School of Medicine, Dept. of
Orthopaedic Surgery, 3Ege University School of Medicine, Dept. of
Radiology, Izmir, Turkey
Objective: To evaluate patients with osteoporotic hip fractures regarding
the relationship among ambulation, risk factors for osteoporosis, mortality
frequency and new fracture rates in the 6-month postoperative period
Methods: We have included in this study, a total of 105 patients, who
were operated at Ege University Faculty of Medicine for osteoporotic hip
fractures. Demographic data as well as presence of previous and accom-
panying fractures, ambulation status, comorbidities, menopause age, fam-
ily history for osteoporosis and fractures, BMD, osteoporosis treatment
and blood vitamin D levels were recorded. At the 6th month after the hip
fracture, the patients were evaluated again in terms of mortality, new
fractures and ambulation status.
Results: 25 of 105 patients had died in the first 6 months. 4% of deaths
occurred during hospitalization, 24% in the first month after discharge,
and 72% between 2-6 months. Control vertebral x-rays were obtained in
49 patients and osteoporotic vertebral fractures were detected in 89.8% of
those. Ratio of immobile patients increased from 1.9% to 31.4%.
According to single regression analysis, the relationships between age,
smoking history, FRAX hip fracture risk and modified Charlson comor-
bidity index and mortality were found to be statistically significant. In the
multiple regression analysis, the relationship between BMI and smoking
history and mortality was found to be statistically significant.
Conclusion: Osteoporosis is a common disease that does not manifest
itself until complications develop. Functional loss and mortality risk are
high in patients with fractures. Therefore, patients should be identified
and treated before fractures develop. In addition, if individuals with os-
teoporotic hip fractures are followed up in fracture liaison services, which
are becoming widespread worldwide, mortality and morbidity can be
reduced.
P441
DEMOGRAPHIC AND DISESASE CHARACTERISTICS OF
PATIENTS WITH OSTEOPOROTIC HIP FRACTURES
Y. Kirazli1, M. Baklaci1, E. Cinar1, E. C. Selbes1, F. Calis1, N. Ozkayin2,
K. Aktuglu2
1Ege University School of Medicine, Dept. of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, 2Ege University School of Medicine, Dept. of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Izmir, Turkey
Objective: Patients with hip fractures often have one or more risk factors
for osteoporosis. This study aimed to assess the relationship of these risk
factors as well as patient characteristics with patient outcomes after oste-
oporotic hip fractures.
Methods: Patient records of our university hospital were searched to iden-
tify cases of osteoporotic hip fractures that were admitted between 1 January-
31 December 2017. Those subjects who could be reached by phone were
include. Demographics, risk factors and ambulation status were questioned
via phone calls. Clinical data were recorded from the patient files.
Results: 206 patients were reached by phone. Results are shown in Table.
Of these patients, 75.7% were functionally independent before fracturing
their hips and this ratio was found to decrease after the fracture to 53.8%.
Conclusion: Nearly half of our patients (46.2%) still need assistance or
are wheelchair bound one year after the fracture. Elderly patients with
femoral fractures have an increased risk for recurring falls and fractures
which may increase their mortality and morbidity.
Table. Characteristics of patients with hip fracture (n:206)
Female sex, n (%)
146 (70.9%)
Age (mean±SD)
79.3±11
BMI, kg/m2 (mean±SD)
24.9±4.1
Age at menopause (mean±SD)
42.7±5.6
Smoking, n (%)
33 (16)
Drinks alcohol, n (%)
13 (6.3)
Number of births (mean±SD)
3.06±3.01
Currently alive n (%)
149 (72.3)
Right side femoral fracture, n (%)
107 (51.9)
Right hand dominant, n (%)
178 (86.4)
Surgically treated n (%)
202 (98)
Days spent in hospital (mean±SD)
6,4±3.2
Previous known fragility fracture n (%)
44 (21.3)
New fracture after hip fracture n (%)
20 (9.7)
Concomitant fracture n (%)
13 (6.3)
Parent with fracture n (%)
5 (3)
Independent ambulation before fracture, n (%)
166 (80.5)
Independent ambulation after fracture, n (%)
111 (53.8)
P442
DOES OSTEOPOROSIS TREATMENT AFFECT THE COURSE
OF COVID-19 IN THE ELDERLY?
M. Hafizoglu1, A. Okyar Bas1, Z. Sahiner1, C. Cavusoglu1, B. B. Dogu1,
M. Cankurtaran1, M. G. Halil1
1Dept. of Internal Medicine, Division of Geriatric Medicine, Hacettepe
University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey
S246
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: In late 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) caused COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic
worldwide and still keeps spreading. Atypical course of COVID-19 could
be seen in elderly. Osteoporosis, as a public health problem, reflects
reduced BMD and increased risk of fracture. The probable effect of
antiosteoporotic drugs on the immune system may lead to consider treat-
ment changes for osteoporosis in elderly during COVID-19 pandemic.
The aim of this study was to show the correlation between osteoporosis
treatments and the prevalence and clinical course of COVID-19 [1-5].
Methods: A total of 828 individuals who were admitted to geriatric
outpatient clinics in the last 2 y and receiving osteoporosis treatment were
included in the study. Patients’ age, sex, comorbidities, treatments for
osteoporosis, treatment durations and COVID-19 evaluations were ob-
tained from electronic file records. Symptomatology, diagnostic methods,
PCR results, and radiological findings of CT scans of the patients who
had COVID-19 were noted.
Results: In total, 141 (17.1%) of 828 patients were male and 687 (82.9%)
were female. Median age was 78 (IQR: 10). Totally 52 (6.2%) of the
patients had diagnosed with COVID-19. When patients were divided into
4 groups according to the osteoporosis treatment they received
(alendronate, denosumab, teriparatide, iv (intravenous) zoledronic acid),
there was no difference in terms of COVID-19 symptoms, PCR results,
radiological findings and COVID-19 evaluations. Treatment durations
are for alendronate 15 (10) months, for denosumab 14 (12) months, for
teriparatide 15 (7.25) months, for iv zoledronic acid 17 (11) months. In
zoledronic acid group, a significant difference was found between treat-
ment durations and COVID-19 evaluation (p=0.024). Treatment changes
were made in 56 (6.8%) patients during the COVID-19 pandemic, 3
(0.4%) patients were switched to alendronate, 41 (5%) patients to
denosumab, 6 (0.7%) to teriparatide and 6 (0.7%) to iv zoledronic acid.
There was no significant difference between treatment change and the
presence of COVID-19 (p=0.559).
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, there is no clear evidence that
osteoporosis treatment affects the course of COVID-19. In our study we
could not find a relationship between the actual treatments used for oste-
oporosis and prevalence or course of COVID-19. So during COVID-19
outbreak, it is more crucial to emphasize the importance of the treatment
continuity than changing modality for bone metabolism. Considering the
burden of osteoporosis in the older population, the management of oste-
oporosis needs to be prioritized during COVID-19 pandemic.
References:
1.
Perrotta, F, et al. Aging Clin Exp Res 2020;32:1599.
2.
Tay, HS, Harwood R. Age Ageing 2020;49:523.
3.
Formenti AM, et al. Endocrine 2020;70:203.
4.
Pietrobon AJ, et al. Front Immunol 2020;11:579220.
5.
Yu EW et al. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:1009.
P443
BEWARE OF THE TOXIC POTENTIAL OF PHARMA-
CEUTICAL VITAMIN D SUPPLEMENTS: A CROSS-
SECTIONAL SURVEY FROM A TERTIARY CARE CENTRE
H. Majid1, N. Shamim1, A. Khan1
1Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan
Objective: The increased awareness about vitamin D deficiency pro-
voked significant increase in supplementation. This study aims to deter-
mine the frequency, clinical features, and pharmacological factors of hy-
pervitaminosis D in children.
Methods: A retrospective cross-sectional study was conducted. All chil-
dren <18 y with 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) levels performed be-
tween January 1 to December 31, 2018 at AKUH Clinical Laboratory
were evaluated. Medical records of children at AKUH with vitamin D
level >50 ng/ml were reviewed for clinical features and pharmacological
risk factors.
Results: A total of 118,149 subjects were tested for serum 25OHD
level in 2018, out of which 16,316 (13.8%) were children. Of these,
16.6% (n=2720) were registered at AKUH for consultation. 22%
(n=602) had serum 25OHD levels >50 ng/ml. The median age and
25OHD levels were 3.1 (17.93) y and 70.1(100) ng/ml with 57.3%
(n=345) boys. Use of vitamin D supplementation was reported in
33.1% (n=197) and of these 97.9% (n=193) were prescribed by
physicians. Megadoses were utilized by 34.17% (n=68) while rest
had taken different combination in tablets/syrups form. In mega-
doses, 600,000 (44.1%, n=30) and 200,000 units (45.5%, n=31)
vitamin D injections were commonly prescribed. The main indica-
tions for prescribing were aches/pains (25.8%, n=51), developmental
delay (25.3%, n=50), and vitamin D deficiency (24.8%, n=49). The
main symptoms of hypervitaminosis D or toxicity were abdominal
pain (13.7%), and constipation (15.7%).
Conclusion: Vitamin D supplementation should be done cautiously in
children as toxicity though rare but may happen and cause serious effects
specially with frequent mega doses and prolonged supplementation.
P444
EFFECT OF DALCROZE EURHYTHMICS EXERCISE ON
PHYSICAL FUNCTION AND MUSCLE IN SARCOPENIC
OLDER ADULTS: THE SARCARE RANDOMIZED
CONTROLLED TRIAL
M. Hars1, F. Herrmann2, T. Chevalley3, S. L. Ferrari3, G. Gold2, R.
Rizzoli3, P. Vuilleumier4, A. Trombetti1
1Division of Bone Diseases, Dept. of Medicine & Division of Geriatrics,
Dept. of Readaptation and Geriatrics, Geneva University Hospitals and
Faculty of Medicine, 2Division of Geriatrics, Dept. of Readaptation and
Geriatrics, Geneva University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine,
3Division of Bone Diseases, Dept. of Medicine, Geneva University
Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine, 4Laboratory for Behavioural
Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, Campus Biotech, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Objective: Most therapeutic interventions for sarcopenia currently under
development focus on increasing muscle mass. Given the growing evi-
dence pointing towards the key role of the central nervous system in
sarcopenia, it can be hypothesized that specific interventions influencing
this system may also exert a significant effect on physical function in
sarcopenic elders. Dalcroze eurhythmics (DE) exercise has previously
been shown to increase physical performances and reduce falls in older
adults at high risk for falls [1], but also to modify central nervous system
activity. The SARCARE trial was mainly designed to determine i) the
effectiveness of a DE exercise intervention in improving physical func-
tion and reducing falls among sarcopenic older adults, and ii) whether
exercise-related benefits are associated with changes at central level. Here
we report the effects on physical function and muscle.
Methods: The SARCARE study (ISRCTN39600964) is a single-centre,
single-blind, two-arm, randomized controlled trial, in which community-
dwelling sarcopenic adults aged ≥65 y were randomized (1:1) to i) a DE
exercise group (2x/week 1-h supervised group-based) or ii) a CONtrol
group (no exercise), and assessed at baseline, 6- and 12-month. Both
groups received also regular educational lectures on relevant topics for
older adults. The primary outcome was change in Short Physical
Performance Battery (SPPB) score at 12 months. Secondary outcomes
included, among others, changes in muscle strength and mass (assessed
by DXA), falls, cognition, and quality of life.
Results: Among 196 randomized participants (mean age, 75.2 y; 89%
women), 171 (87%) completed the study. The adherence rate to the DE
exercise intervention was 81%. At 12 months, physical function im-
proved in the DE group compared to CON group (group*time interaction
for SPPB score: 1.48, 95%CI 0.98 to 1.98; p<0.001). Significant
S247
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
improvements were also found in the DE group on muscle strength (5x
chair stand time and hand grip strength, p<0.01 for both) compared to
CON group, while no effect was found on muscle mass (appendicular
lean mass/height2: -0.01, 95%CI -0.09 to 0.09; p=0.95).
Conclusion: A 12-month DE exercise program was effective in improv-
ing physical function and muscle strength in sarcopenic older adults,
without change in muscle mass. Further analysis should help to clarify
the mechanisms underlying the muscular benefits of DE training.
Reference: 1. Trombetti A, et al. Arch Intern Med 2011;171:525.
Acknowledgments: This study is funded by the Swiss National Science
Foundation (grant #32003B_166690) and FROMO Foundation.
P445
CROSS-CULTURAL ADAPTATION OF THE GREEK VERSION
OF THE EXERCISE ADHERENCE RATING SCALE
M. Tsekoura1, A. Papadopoulou2, V. Sakellari3, J. Gliatis4, E. Billis1
1Dept. of Physiotherapy, School of Health Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Patras, Aigio, 2Clinical Physiotherapist, Patras, 3Dept. of
Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health and Care Sciences, University of West
Attica, Athens, 4Dept. of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Patras, Patras, Greece
Objective: To adapt the Exercise Adherence Rating Scale (EARS) into
Greek and evaluate its measurement properties, in community-dwelling
older adults.
Methods: 23 older adults between 60-86 y, 14 women, 9 men; mean age
of 71.2±6.98 y) were enrolled in this study. Permission for the cross-
cultural adaptation was received from the developer of the EARS.
Cross-cultural adaptation of the EARS was done based on Beaton guide-
lines (forward translation, synthesis, back translation, expert committee
review, and pretesting). Participants were oriented on undertaking the
prescribed home-based exercise program in the first session, and adher-
ence behavior was assessed after 1 week, and finally reassessed after 2
weeks (test-retest reliability). Six weeks after the first assessment, they
were invited again to full fill the EARS (responsiveness). The intraclass
correlation coefficient (ICC2,1) and Cronbach’s α were used to assess
test-retest reliability and internal consistency. Receiver operating charac-
teristic (ROC) curve was analyzed to identify cutoff score, sensitivity and
specificity of EARS. Ethical approval was obtained from the University
of Patras and written informed consent was obtained from each
participant.
Results: The Greek version of the EARS questionnaire (EARS-GR) was
translated without major difficulties. The forward and back translation
revealed no content or language-related issues. Results show high internal
consistency (Cronbach's α of 0.92) and excellent test-retest reliability
(ICC=0.93, 95%CI=0.93-0.95) for 6-item adherence behavior. The area
under the curve was 0.89 with 95%CI 0.77-1.00 at p=0.003. The cutoff
score was found 17.5 with 87% sensitivity and 79% specificity.
Conclusion: The EARS has been cross-culturally adapted to the Greek
language. The EARS-GR was comprehensible and reliable and may thus,
be used across in clinical settings and research. Further studies are rec-
ommended to investigate other psychometric properties of the EARS-GR
with a larger sample including various diseases.
P446
INFLUENCE OF INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS ON THE
C O N C E N T R A T I O N
O F
M E T H O T R E X A T E
POLYGLUTAMATES IN PATIENTS WITH RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS
G. Gridneva1, E. Aronova1, A. Kudryavtceva1, E. Samarkina1, I.
Dydykina1, Y. Muraviev1, N. Baymeeva2
1V.A.Nasonova Rheumatology Research Institute, 2Mental Health
Center, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Individual characteristics of patients with rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) (such as age, gender, BMI, red blood cell volume) can influence the
results of treatment with methotrexate (MTX). It has been established that
in order to obtain a good and moderate therapeutic effect of MTX, it is
necessary that the achieved level of polyglutamates (MTXPGs), mea-
sured in erythrocytes. This study aimed to evaluate the effect on the
concentration of polyglutamates of methotrexate (MTXPGs) of individ-
ual characteristics of patients with RA.
Methods: The study included 60 patients with RA (26 men and 44 wom-
en) in accordance with ACR/EULAR 2010 criteria who have received at
least 20 mg of MTX subcutaneously per week for at least 12 weeks. Older
patients included 24 women over 55 years old and 7 men over 60 years
old (group 1, n=31), the rest made up group 2 (n=29). Polyglutamates
MTX with 2,3 and glutamic acid residues were measured in erythrocytes
(RBCs) using tandem chromatography mass spectrometry.
Results: In group 1 patients, the concentration of MTXPG2, MTXPG3
and MTXPG4 was 9.0 [4.0; 8.3], 16.1 [9.0; 16.6], 24.7 [20.8; 30.2]
nmol/l, in group 2, respectively 7.5 [4.1; 9.0], 16.0 [9.9; 20.0], 23.8
[17.5; 29.2] nmol/L. The differences were not statistically significant.
The groups did not differ in the duration of MTX, single and cumulative
doses of MTX, and the number of RBCs; in group 1, a good and moderate
response to therapy was noted in 9 (29%), in group 2 - 19 (65%)
responded to therapy, p=0.01. BMI in group 1 was 29±6 kg/m2, in group
2 - 25±2 kg/m2 (p=0.0064).The response to therapy did not differ be-
tween the groups. The average weekly dose of MTX per 1 m2 of body
surface was higher in group 2 (12.6±2.2 mg vs. 11.3±2 mg, p=0.02). A
correlation was found between the level of MTXPG2 and BMI
(Spearman's correlation coefficient 0.268).
Conclusion: The concentration of MTXPGs in groups of patients of
different ages did not differ. The concentration of MTXPGs did not cor-
relate with the total volume of erythrocytes. MTXPG2 level correlates
with BMI.
P447
R A D I O F R E Q U E N C Y
E C H O G R A P H I C
M U L T I
SPECTROMETRY (REMS) FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF
OSTEOPOROSIS IN PATIENTS WITH DIFFERENT BODY
MASS INDEX
B. Cortet1, E. M. Dennison2, A. Diez-Perez3, M. Locquet4, M. Muratore5,
X. Nogués3, D. Ovejero Crespo3, M. L. Brandi6
1University-Hospital of Lille, Dept. of Rheumatology and EA 4490, Lille,
France, 2Southampton General Hospital, University of Southampton, MRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, UK, 3IMIM (Hospital del
Mar Medical Research Institute), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red en Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable, ISCIII, Musculoskeletal
Research Group, Barcelona, Spain, 4University of Liège, Dept. of Public
Health, Epidemiology and Health Economics, Liège, Belgium, 5Vito Fazzi
Hospital, ASL-LE, O.U. of Rheumatology, Lecce, Italy, 6The National
Observatory on Fragility Fractures, Florence, Italy
(The authors BC, ED, ADP, ML, MM, XN, DOC are equal contributors
listed in alphabetical order.)
Objective: To assess the diagnostic performance of radiofrequency
echographic multispectrometry (REMS) at the femoral neck in women
with different BMI against DXA as the reference, following previous
studies at the lumbar spine that suggested strong diagnostic agreement
for all BMI categories [1].
Methods: Six European centers participated in this study. Caucasian
women aged 30-90 y, without walking impairment, referred for femoral
DXA were enrolled. Informed consent was obtained. The patients under-
went femoral neck DXA and REMS scans of the femoral neck using
standard methodology. Reports were checked and cleaned according to
the usual protocol [2]. Results were analysed grouping patients by BMI,
as underweight (UW), normal weight (NW), and overweight/obese
(OW). DXA and REMS T-score values were used to classify patients
S248
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
as osteoporotic, osteopenic or healthy. The degree of correlation between
DXA and REMS BMD values was quantified by calculating Pearson’s
correlation coefficient (r). The diagnostic concordance between both
exams was assessed by Cohen’s K considering the diagnostic classifica-
tion based on T-score values [2].
Results: 3608 patients were included in the analyses: 97 (2.7%)
corresponded to UW patients, 1905 (52.8%) NW patients, 1606 (44.5%)
OW patients. The correlation between REMS and DXA BMD values was
high, with r=0.93, 0.94 and 0.91 for UW, NW and OW patients, respec-
tively. Sensitivity and specificity of REMS against a DXA gold standard
were 98.0% and 88.0% for UW patients, 93.6% and 92.7% for NW
patients, 88.2% and 98.6% for OW patients, respectively. Cohen’s K
was 0.86, 0.81 and 0.87 for UW, NW and OW patients, respectively.
Conclusion: Strong diagnostic agreement between REMS and DXA was
observed for each BMI category at the femoral neck.
References:
1.
Brandi ML, et al. POS1111, EULAR Congress 2021.
2.
Di Paola M, et al. Osteoporos Int 2019;30:391.
P446
D I F F E R E N T I A L E F F E C T S O F T E R I P A R A T I D E ,
ZOLEDRONATE AND DENOSUMAB ON HIP STRUCTURAL
AND MECHANICAL PARAMETERS IN OSTEOPOROSIS
(OP): A REAL-LIFE STUDY
N. Jaarah1, C. Lam1, N. Lodhia1, D. Dulnoan1, G. Hampson2
1Osteoporosis Unit, Guy's Hospital, 2Osteoporosis Unit and Metabolic
Bone Clinic, Guy's Hospital, London, UK
Objective: To evaluate and compare changes in hip geometry following
treatment with different OP medications in a metabolic bone clinic.
Methods: We studied 244 patients with OP with mean [SD] age of
71.4[11.1] y. They were divided into 3 groups; Group A received
teriparatide; n=50, F: 50, age: 72.9[7.9] y, Group B were on denosumab;
n=116, F: 105, M: 11, age 72.7[10.8] y, and Group C were on intravenous
zoledronate; n=78, F: 67, M: 11, age 68.5[12.8] y. BMD was measured
by DXA at the lumbar spine (LS), total hip (TH) and femoral neck (FN)
prior to treatment and after 2 y (Group A), after a mean treatment duration
of 3.3[1.3] y (Group B) and after 3 y (Group C). Hip structural analysis
(HSA) was carried out retrospectively from DXA-acquired femur images
at the narrow neck (NN), the intertrochanter (IT) and femoral shaft (FS).
Results: BMD increased significantly at the LS (% change from baseline:
mean [SEM] Group A: 9.9[1.14]%, Group B: 5.7 [0.62]%, Group C:
5.2[0.8]% p<0.001). Increases in hip BMD were seen in Group B only
(TH: 1.9[0.61]%, p=0.002). We saw a significant increase in cross-
sectional area (CSA) at the NN: 3.5[1.4]% p=0.016 in Group A and in
several HSA parameters at the NN in Group C (subperiosteal width or
outer diameter (OD); 2.8[0.88%] p=0.005, the cortical width (CW);
3.0[1.0]% p=0.01, CSA: 3.7[1/1]% p=0.003, cross-sectional moment of
inertia (CSMI); 6.1[2.3]% p=0.021). In contrast, improvement in the
HSA parameters at the IT were seen in group B (IT CSA: 3.3[0.67]%,
CSMI: 5.9[1.3]%. section modulus (Z): 6.2[1.1]%, cortical thickness (Co
Th): 2.6[0.78]%, buckling ratio (BR):-3.0[0.86]%, p< 0.001) with small
changes at the FS (CSA: 1.2[0.4]% p=0.005, Z:1.6 [0.76]%, p=0.04).
Conclusion: Analysis of the effect of OP therapies on hip geometry is
useful in understanding the mechanisms of their antifracture effect and
may provide additional information on their efficacy.
P449
MEASUREMENT PROPERTIES OF THE SHORT FORM
SARCOPENIA QUALITY OF LIFE (SF-SARQOL ®)
QUESTIONNAIRE IN AN INTERNATIONAL DATASET
A. Geerinck1, C. Beaudart1, J.-Y. Reginster1, Z. B. Wojszel2, F. De Souza
Orlandi3, G. Bahat4, T. Erdoğan4, B. Montero-Errasquín5, V. Alekna6, O.
Bruyère1
1Division of Public Health, Epidemiology and Health Economics,
University of Liège, World Health Organization Collaborating Center
for Public Health Aspects of Musculo-skeletal Health and Ageing,
Liège, Belgium, 2Dept. of Geriatrics, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland, 3Dept. of Gerontology, Federal University of São
Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil, 4Division of Geriatrics, Dept. of Internal
Medicine, Istanbul Medical School, Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey, 5Dept. of Geriatrics, University Hospital Ramón y Cajal,
IRYCIS, Madrid, Spain, 6Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania
Objective: A shorter, 14-item, version of the SarQoL® questionnaire was
recently developed, and has demonstrated good clinimetric properties in a
sample of 214 older people from Belgium. This study aimed to further
investigate the measurement properties of the SF-SarQoL® in an interna-
tional sample.
Methods: A secondary analysis of data collected from older, community-
dwelling people in Brazil, Lithuania, Poland, Spain, and Turkey was
performed. The 14 items of the SF-SarQoL were extracted from the
original 55-item SarQoL questionnaire and used to calculate the SF-
SarQoL score. Sarcopenia and probable sarcopenia was diagnosed with
the EWGSOP1 or EWGSOP2 criteria. Discriminative power between
sarcopenic and nonsarcopenic groups was evaluated for each country
separately because of the heterogeneity between diagnostic criteria.
Internal consistency was evaluated with the Cronbach’s alpha and the
McDonald’s omega values. Correspondence between the overall quality
of life (QoL) score of the short and long form of the SarQoL questionnaire
was determined using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). We
performed a confirmatory factor analysis to investigate the structural va-
lidity of the SF-SarQoL.
Results: The 775 included participants had an average age of 75.8±7.8
years old, and most were women (70.6%). Sarcopenic participants had
significantly (p<0.05) worse QoL scores compared to nonsarcopenic peo-
ple in 4 out of the 5 included studies, confirming discriminative power.
Internal consistency was high with an alpha value of 0.872 (95%CI:
0.858-0.885) and an omega value of 0.875 (95%CI: 0.862-0.888). We
found a very high level of correspondence between the SarQoL and the
SF-SarQoL score with an ICC of 0.907 (95%CI: 0.894-0.919). Robust fit
indicators did not demonstrate good fit for a 1-factor model (CFI=0.931;
TLI=0.918; RMSEA=0.169; SRMR=0.085) but improved for a 2-factor
model (CFI=0.952; TLI=0.942; RMSEA=0.142; SRMR=0.076) which
previously showed good fit in a Belgian sample.
Conclusion: The SF-SarQoL measures sarcopenia-related quality of life
with less response burden than the SarQoL questionnaire and demon-
strates adequate measurement properties. Its structural validity should
be further investigated.
Disclosures: CB, JYR and OB are shareholders of SarQoL SPRL
P450
COMPARISON OF BODY COPOSITION BETWEEN HEALTHY
SUBJECTS AND POST-COVID PATIENTS EVALUATED
THROUGH DUAL FULL-BODY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY
L. E. Quintanar-Trejo1, R. Coronado-Zarco1, A. Olascoaga-Gómez de
León1, K. Zarco-Ordoñez1, N. C. Centeno-Morales1, X. López-
Megchun1, A. Y. A. Aragón-Hernandez1, J. Quinzaños-Fresnedo1
1Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: To evaluate the body composition in subjects after infection
by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, compared with a group of healthy controls.
Methods: Full-body DXA (with the 2018 generation Hologic Discovery
W equipment) was performed on post-COVID-19 patients three weeks
after diagnosis of the infection. They were compared with a group of
healthy controls of both genders, older than 18 years old, with no history
of SARS-CoV-2 virus infection. The variables of the body composition
were divided into: associated with visceral adipose tissue (VAT),
S249
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
distribution in the body fat proportion and indices of fat mass and muscle
mass. Statistical analysis: measures of central tendency and dispersion
were calculated for the quantitative variables, normality distribution was
evaluated with the KS test. For the parametric variables, a comparison of
means was performed with the Student’s T-test and Pearson's correlation.
For nonparametric variables, medians were compared using the Mann-
Whitney U and correlated with Spearman's Rho. Registration at the
Research and Ethics Committee 43/20.
Results: 25 controls (mean age 36.7; SD±10.5 yo) and 59 cases (mean age
42.3; SD±12.3 yo) (p=0.054) were included. Statistically significant differ-
ences were found in the variables BMI, VAT mass, VAT volume and VAT
area, fat mass index, trunk/leg fat and trunk/limb fat mass ratio. A statisti-
cally significant correlation was observed between BMI, VAT variables, fat
mass index, trunk/leg fat and trunk/limb fat mass ratio.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that patients with COVID presented an
alteration in the distribution of body mass, concentrating on the visceral
area.
P451
INFECTIOUS COMPLICATIONS AS A REASON FOR THE
CANCELLATION OF BIOLOGIC DISEASE-MODIFYING
ANTI-RHEUMATIC DRUGS
E. Aronova1, G. Gridneva1, A. Kudryavtceva1, I. Dydykina1, G. Lukina2
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, 2Moscow Clinical
Scientific Center Loginov A.S., Moscow, Russia
Objective: To study infectious complications of therapy with biologics,
analyze the frequency of withdrawal of bDMARDs due to infectious
complications.
Methods: The ambispective analysis included data on 512 cases of pre-
scribing biologics with different mechanism of action in 190 patients with
rheumatoid arthritis (162 women, 28 men).
Results: Patients in the study group received from 2-6 bDMARDs, median
(25-75%) 3 (2-3). Biologics were discontinued 331 times, of which due to
the development of serious adverse reactions - 70 times, of which due to the
development of infectious complications - 16 times (3% of all cases of
discontinuations, 22.8% of all serious adverse reactions). During treatment
with the first bDMARD, infectious complications that required discontin-
uation of the drug developed in 5.2% of cases (N=10), with the second
bDMARD - in 5.1% of cases (N=4), no statistical differences were found
between these groups. On the background of treatment with the third
bDMARD, infectious complications led to the withdrawal of treatment in
2.6% of cases (N=1), in the fourth - 0%, in the fifth - 14.3% of cases (N=1)
and in sixth - 0%. There was no correlation between the number of sequen-
tially prescribed biologics and the incidence of infectious complications.
68.8% (11 cases) of serious infections occurred during the first year of
therapy. Most often, serious infections developed during treatment with
drugs of the TNFα inhibitor group (infliximab, etanercept, adalimumab,
golimumab, certolizumab pegol) and tofacitinib. Out of 16 cases of infec-
tious complications, 5 were associated with tuberculosis infection.
Conclusion: Infectious complications make up a significant proportion
(22.8%) of all serious adverse reactions leading to the discontinuations of
biologics in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The frequency of discon-
tinuation of bDMARDs due to infectious complications was about 5%
and did not change during treatment with both the first and second bio-
logics. It is necessary to remain alert about tuberculosis infection and
examine patients before prescribing and during treatment with
bDMARDs.
P452
PHARMACY DISPENSING RECORDS FOR TOPICAL
DICLOFENAC IN SWEDEN: A RETROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS
OF REAL-WORLD DATA
V. Rampartaap1, E. Csoke2, D. Nair3, T. Wilcox4, J. R. Norrefalk5, V.
Sethi6, G. Shanga7, K. Fabrikant8
1GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
2N.A., Basel, Switzerland, 3GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare,
Stockholm, Sweden, 4Evidera, Maryland, USA, 5Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden, 6GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare,
Singapore, Singapore, 7GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, New
Jersey, USA, 8GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, London, UK
Objective: To describe prescription patterns of topical diclofenac alone
or with other medications in the real world.
Methods: This retrospective cross-sectional study, characterizes the jour-
ney of patients prescribed topical diclofenac (Anatomical Therapeutic
Chemical (ATC) code level 7) over a 12-month period (March 2019 –
February 2020) in Sweden. The Swedish eHealth Agency (E-
hälsomyndigheten) database of national electronic prescriptions was used
as a data source. The data was assessed to measure the percentage of
prescriptions filled, and the number of treatment switches as the primary
outcome. Percentage of patients who filled prescriptions for co-
medications such as for cardiovascular (CV), Gastrointestinal (GI),
CV+ GI and other Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) tak-
en with topical diclofenac were measured as secondary outcome.
Results: In Sweden, out of 14,569 patients 12,145 (83.4%) patients were
identified with at least one prescription for topical diclofenac and met the
study inclusion/exclusion criteria. The mean age of patients who received
topical diclofenac prescription was 73 years, of which females were pre-
dominant (73.9%). However, the largest age group for topical diclofenac
prescription was 85+ years (23.8%). Most of the patients 79.5% filled in 1
prescription of topical diclofenac, 12.3% patients had 2, 3.7% patients
had 3, and 4.5% had >3 prescriptions of topical diclofenac during the 12-
month period. For the year analysed 96.7% of the patients did not switch
treatment before Month 4 and 98.1% before Month 7, irrespective of
when topical diclofenac was first prescribed. No patient had more than
1 switch to topical alternatives to diclofenac. Physicians who prescribed
topical diclofenac also prescribed it in combination with CV drugs
(49.0%), GI drugs (30.0%), CV+GI drugs (19.3%) during the same 12-
month period. At the same time, prescription of topical diclofenac with
other NSAIDS (9.1%) was least observed.
Conclusion: This study shows that topical diclofenac was mainly pre-
scribed to older patients above 70 years and most predominantly to fe-
males. Data suggests adherence among patients to their topical diclofenac
prescription. A high proportion of patients prescribed topical diclofenac
were also prescribed with drugs either for CV or/and GI conditions.
Disclosures: Funding for the study including the data analyses and protocol
development was provided by GSK Consumer Healthcare. Vishal
Rampartaap, Deepika Nair, Vidhu Sethi, Gilbert Shanga and Kate
Fabrikant are employees of GSK Consumer Healthcare. Emese Csoke
was employee at time of study set-up. Jan Rickard Norrefalk acted as con-
sultant for protocol development and Teresa Wilcox provided data analysis.
P453
CLINICAL AND DEMOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENT OF
PATIENTS WITH REFRACTORY RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
RECEIVED BIOLOGICS
E. Aronova1, G. Gridneva1, A. Kudryavtceva1, I. Dydykina1, G. Lukina2
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, 2Moscow Clinical
Scientific Center Loginov A. S., Moscow, Russia
Objective: Refractory rheumatoid arthritis (RRA) refers to rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) that is resistant (due to ineffectiveness or toxicity) to several
drugs, including methotrexate and at least 2 bDMARDs with different
mechanisms of action. Treatment of patients with RRA remains an urgent
problem due to the difficulties arising in the choice of drug therapy. This
study aimed to study the clinical and demographic characteristics of pa-
tients with RRA.
Methods: The anamnestic data of 40 adult patients with RRA, observed
at the V.A. Nasonova RIR from 2010-2018. The study did not include
S250
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
patients who were sequentially treated with bDMARDs from the TNFα
inhibitor group as the first and second drugs. Statistica software (version
12) was used for statistical processing.
Results: The studied group was represented mainly by women (N=32,
80%), who received from 3 to 6 bDMARDs, median 3 [3-4]. Clinical
forms of RA were presented as seropositive for rheumatoid factor (RF)
RA in 17 patients (42.5%), RA with extra-articular manifestations in 6
(15.0%), RA seronegative for RF in 16 (40.0%)), Still's disease in adults
in 1 (2.5%). The average age at the time of RA debut in the study group
was 31.1±17.0 y. The onset of RA in juvenile age was observed in 10
patients (25.0%). At the time of bDMARD initiation, the average age of
patients was 39.8±15.1 y, and the prescription of RA was 8.7±6.3 y. 17
patients (42.5%) received 4 bDMARDs, 5 (12.5%) - 5 bDMARDs, 2
(5%) - 6 bDMARDs. As the first biologic in the study group, the follow-
ing were prescribed: TNF inhibitors - 23 patients (57.5%), abatacept - 10
(25.5%), rituximab - 4 (10.0%), tocilizumab - 3 (7, 5%). As the second
bDMARD: TNF inhibitors - 15 patients (37.5%), rituximab - 10 (25%),
tocilizumab - 8 (20%) and abatacept -7 (17.5%). The first bDMARD was
discontinued due to ineffectiveness in 29 patients (72.5%), due to the
development of serious adverse events in 11 patients (27.5%). Second
bDMARD in 31 (77.5%) and 9 (22.5%), respectively.
Conclusion: In the study group, patients with RRA were represented
mainly by women with seronegative RA in the RF, onset of the disease
at a young age and late addition of the first bDMARD (after 8.7±6.3 y
from the onset of the disease).
P454
PREVALENCE OF HYPOPHOSPHATASIA AND LOW SERUM
ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE IN ADULTS WITH ATYPICAL
FEMUR FRACTURES
E. Tsiantouli1, E. Biver1, T. Chevalley1, R. Petrovic1, D. Hannouche1, S.
L. Ferrari1
1Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland
Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare genetic disorder of alkaline phospha-
tase (ALP) deficiency which manifestations in adults include atypical
femoral fractures (AFF). However, the prevalence of low serum ALP
and HPP in AFF patients remains unknown. The aims of this study were
to analyze the prevalence of low ALP and eventually identify HPP mu-
tations in patients with AFF. For this purpose we retrospectively analyzed
hospital records for serum ALP values and symptoms/signs of HPP
among 80 adults admitted to the Geneva University Hospital between
2007 and 2017 with radiologically confirmed AFF. 18 (22.5%) of 80
AFF patients had at least one serum ALP value ≤40 IU/L. ALP values
of AFF patients were further compared with a control group (N=23) of
bisphosphonate-treated patients with prior proximal hip fracture. Lowest
mean ALP values in AFF patients was not lower than in control group.
However most low ALP values were associated with concomitant
antiresorptive (AR) treatment and virtually all AFF patients also present-
ed ALP values >40 IU/L at other time points (i.e., without AR).
Nevertheless, low ALP in AFF subjects was associated with higher per-
centage of bilateral AFF (44.4%), metatarsal fractures (22.2%), chronic
fatigue and pain (16.6%), glucocorticoid (22.2%) and proton pump in-
hibitor (61.1%) medication. Eventually, 3 AFF subjects with consistently
low serum ALP were tested for TNSALP mutations and one with a
clinical suspicion of HPP was found to carry a rare pathogenic heterozy-
gous variant (c.787T>C, p.Tyr263His). In conclusion, low ALP values
are common among subjects with AFF, although mainly related to AR
therapy. Despite the poor specificity of low ALP values in this context,
persistently low values in absence of AR together with associated clinical
signs of HPP may orient towards a genetic diagnosis of this rare disorder
among AFF patients.
P455
CORRELATION BETWEEN HIGHER DOSES OF VITAMIN D
SUPPLEMENTS AND TOTAL CANCER INCIDENCE AND
MORTALITY
R. Amir1
1Centre de Santé des Fagnes Chimay, Chimay, Belgium
Objective: Previous meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of
vitamin D supplementation and total cancer incidence and mortality
found inconsistent results. Vitamin D supplement has been widely
marketed for its claimed anticancer properties (1).
Methods: Low vitamin D status as a risk factor for cancer has been
widely evaluated in cohort and case-control studies (2,3). The mecha-
nisms underlying the observed significant association between vitamin
D supplement and cancer mortality have not yet been fully elucidated.
Results: Evidence from animal and in vitro studies suggests that vitamin
D plays an important role in carcinogenesis and angiogenesis, and further
affects cancer mortality via several ways, such as reducing cell prolifer-
ation, stimulating apoptosis and suppressing cell differentiation of cancer
cells, as well as anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties (4).
Observational epidemiologic studies, however, suggest divergent pat-
terns, with evidence for a broad benefit of vitamin D weakening for
cancer incidence but strengthening for cancer mortality. Studies of circu-
lating 25(OH)D, measured either during the prediagnostic period or short-
ly after diagnosis of cancer, have demonstrated superior survival in cancer
patients with higher circulating 25(OH)D levels (5,6).
Conclusion: Taking in account the synthesis of different data, efforts to
achieve circulating levels of 25(OH)D around 55-135 nmol/l may con-
tribute to reducing cancer mortality. To consistently raise the level above
75 nmol/l, at least 1500-2000 IU/d intake of vitamin D may be required
for adults.
References:
1. Byers T. Am J Epidemiol 2010;172:1.
2. Pilz S, et al. Anticancer Agents Med Chem 2013;13:107.
3. Choi YJ, et al. World J Gastroenterol 2015;21:8868.
4. Feldman D, et al. Nat Rev Cancer 2014;14:342.
5. Song ZY, et al. Endocr Connect 2018;7:R294.
6. Vrieling A, et al. Int J Cancer 2014;134:2972.
P456
THE RISK FACTORS AND FREQUENCY OF OSTEOPOROTIC
FRACTURES OVER 10 YEARS OF FOLLOW-UP IN THE
SIBERIAN POPULATION
E. Mazurenko1, O. Rymar1, L. Shcherbakova1, S. Malyutina1
1Research Institute of Internal & Preventive Medicine – Branch of the
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy
of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia
Objective: To study the frequency of osteoporotic fractures (OF) over 10
y of follow-up and risk factors for OF in people aged over 50 y
(Novosibirsk).
Methods: In 2003-2005, a screening examination of persons aged 45-69
(n=9360) was carried out within the framework of the international pro-
ject HAPIEE (Novosibirsk). The information was collected on OF during
the last 12 months and risk factors for OF, registration of socio-
demographic data, anthropometry, and a study of biochemical blood pa-
rameters. In 2017-2018 on the second examination (n=828), data on the
frequency of OF that occurred over 10 years of observation were retro-
spectively collected. The analysis included 574 people who were 50-69
years old at the 1st screening (2003-2005) of the project (postmenopausal
women). Statistical analysis was carried out by SPSS package (v.13.0).
Results: Among studied 574 subjects (mean age 59.0±5.2) there were
234 men and 340 women. During the 10-y follow-up, OF occurred in
S251
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
9.6% subjects, women had OF 3 times more often than men (13.2% and
4.3%, respectively, p=0.001). Among 55 persons with fractures, 14.6%
had a second re-fracture within 10 y of follow-up. Women with a history
of OF during 10 y of follow-up had lower weight (p=0.021), BMI
(p=0.018), waist circumference (p=0.037), hip circumference (p=0.050)
compared with women without OF. Women with OF were more likely to
be overweight (BMI 25-30 kg/m2) (p=0.029), while women without OF
were more likely to have BMIs characteristic of obesity (p=0.004), as
well as women with OF smoked more often (p=0.032) and had falls in
the last 12 months (p=0.023) than women without OF. There is not a
significant difference in the studied parameters in men with and without
OF. According to the results of a multivariate analysis in women, the risk
of OF associated with a smoking (OR=4.003 (95%Cl=1.29-12.46), Ca
consumption <1000 mg/d (OR=2.320 (95%Cl=1.01-5.34), falls
(OR=2.834 (95%Cl=1.07-7.53) while BMI is negatively associated with
OF (OR=0.914 (95%Cl=0.85-0.99) independent of other factors. In men,
we did not reveal other factors associated with OF.
Conclusion: In studied Siberian population sample aged 50–69 the fre-
quency of OF during 10 y of follow-up was high and amounted to 9.6%.
Women had OF 3 times more often than men р=0.001. In women, the risk
of OF increased 4 times with smoking, 2 times with Ca consumption
<1000 mg/d and a falls, and decreased with an increase in BMI.
Acknowledgement: The study was supported by RSF №20-15-00371;
State target №AAAA-A17-117112850280-2
P457
EFFECT OF PREVIOUS HOSPITALIZATION IN PATIENTS
WITH HIP FRACTURE ON 12-MONTH MORTALITY
G. Vieira Factori1, A. Pereira Pinto2, J. Fonseca Ferreira3
1Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã,
2Guarda Local Health Unit, Orthopedics, Guarda, 3Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã; Guarda Local Health
Unit, Rheumatology, Guarda, Portugal
Objective: Assess mortality at 12 months post-fracture associated with
previous hospitalization. Assess overall mortality and at 6 and 24 months
postfacture associated with previous hospitalization. Assess postfracture
mortality associated with each specialty of previous hospitalization.
Assess postfracture mortality associated with the duration of previous
hospitalization. Assess the impact of prefracture hospitalization on
fracture-related indicators (type of fracture and treatment, duration of
postfracture hospital stay, time to surgery). Assess factors that influence
12-month mortality.
Methods: A retrospective cohort study of all consecutive patients admit-
ted in the Orthopedic ward of a tertiary hospital with frailty hip fracture
between 1 January 2017 and 30 June 2018 (18 months). All data were
collected through revision of patients’ charts and included socio-
demographic data, type of fracture, fracture treatment, overall mortality
and at 6, 12, and 24 months postfracture, hospitalization in the 3 months
before fracture, comorbidities, and chronic medication. The sample was
divided into 2 groups (with and without prefracture hospitalization), and
all variables under study were compared. Mortality was evaluated con-
cerning the existence of prefracture hospitalization and each ward in
which it occurred.
Results: Of 538 patients with hip fracture, 501 were identified with frailty
fractures, of which 75.25% were female, with a mean age of 83.88±8.53
y; of these, 71.66% with no prior fractures. Mortality at 12 months was
23.15%, with no significant association with prefracture hospitalization
(23.68%, p=0.936). A classification tree identified age, sex, and fall-
associated medication as determinant factors in 12-month mortality.
Through a logistic regression (controlled for age, sex, and fall-
associated medication), a significant association was found between
prefracture hospitalization in the Orthopedic ward and 12-month mortal-
ity (p=0.042), with a 5.145 odds ratio (CI 95% 1.061-24.948).
Conclusion: Patients admitted to the Orthopedic ward in the 3 months
before a hip fracture are at about 5 times greater risk for mortality at 12
months after fracture.
P458
SEASONAL ANALYSIS OF VITAMIN D LEVELS IN
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISEASES OUTPATIENT CLINIC IN
TURKEY
S. Kanyilmaz1, O. B. Colak1, M. B. Ozdemir1, R. Akgun1, E. Demirhan1,
S. Atar1, A. R. Aydogan1, M. G. Culha2, O. Kuru1
1University of Health Sciences, Prof. Dr. Cemil Tascioglu Hospital, Dept.
of Physical & Rehabilitation Medicine, 2University of Health Sciences,
Prof. Dr. Cemil Tascioglu Hospital, Dept. of Urology, Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: Turkey is a vitamin D deficient country despite its sunny
location (1). Patients with musculoskeletal diseases seen in Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation Outpatient Units might be potential candi-
dates for vitamin D screening and replacement treatment.
Methods: We evaluated adult patients (age >18y) with musculoskeletal
problems referring to outpatient unit in our Physical & Rehabilitation
Medicine Dept. between July 2017- January 2019. Data was collected
retrospectively from patients’ hospital medical records. Patients with a
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OH vitD) laboratory result were includ-
ed in the analysis. Data regarding age, gender and date were also
extracted.
Results: We have revealed 1289 patients’ records. Of these; 1125 (87.3%)
were female and 164 (12.7%) were male. Mean age was 53.2±13.6 (for
women; 54.27±13.17 and men: 45.83±13.96, p<0.001). Mean level of 25-
OHvitDwas26.5±113.8.Meanserumlevelof25-OHvitDwassignificantly
lower in women compared to men (23.63±15.27 vs. 46.43±31.74; p:0.017).
Level of 25-OH vitD differed among seasons and lowest levels were ob-
served in spring and winter (Table1). When analyses were carried among
different age groups, patients over 65 had lowest 25-OH vitD level (16.61
±14.29, p<0.001).
Conclusion: Level of vitamin D can be low in patients with musculo-
skeletal conditions. Geriatric patients are more likely to be vitamin D
deficient, so screening for vitamin D seems rational for elderly. Vitamin
D levels tend to be lowest in winter and spring consistent with published
literature (2).
Table. Serum 25-OH vitamin D levels of patients among seasons.
Season
n (%)
Serum 25-OH
VitD level
Seasonal comparison
P value
Winter
161 (12.4)
21.25±12.15
winter vs. spring
0,793
Spring
314 (24.4)
21.48±16.6
winter vs. summer
0,049
Summer
363 (28.2)
23.40±14.06
winter vs. autumn
<0,001
Autumn
451 (35)
34.40±19.11
spring vs. summer
0,004
Total
1289
26.52±113.75
spring vs. autumn
<0,001
Post hoc analysis
summer vs. autumn
0,002
References:
1.
Alpdemir M, Alpdemir MF. Int J Med Biochem 2019;2:118.
2.
Ono Y, et al. J Bone Miner Metab 2005;23:147.
P459
TERIPARATIDE RETENTION RATE ASSESSMENT (TERRA)
STUDY: COMPARISON BETWEEN ORIGINATOR AND
BIOSIMILAR DRUG
E. Di Donato1, M. Casella1, A. Becciolini1, F. Magalini1, D. Santilli1, F.
Mozzani1, M. Riva1, A. Ariani1
1Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, Dept. of Internal Medicine
& Rheumatology, Parma, Italy
S252
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Osteoporosis (OP) is a metabolic bone disease that lead to
high risk of fractures, especially of vertebrae and femur. In severe OP,
antiresorptive treatment may not be sufficient; therefore, a bone forming
therapeutic strategy is essential. In Europe, the only anabolic drug since
now is teriparatide (TPH), a PTH analogue. As far as we know, there are
no efficacy comparisons in clinical practice between originator TPH
(oTPH) and biosimilar TPH (bsTPH). The aim of this study is to verify
whether the retention rate of oTPH and bsTPH are similar.
Methods: All patients with OP who received a TPH treatment between 1
January 2013 and 30 April 2021 were enrolled. For each of them were
recorded anamnestic data, the number of vertebral and femoral fractures,
lumbar and femoral DXA scores, the duration of TPH treatment and the
possible reason of TPH interruption. Patients were clustered in two
groups, O and BS, according to the received treatment (respectively
oTPH and bsTPH). The retention rate was tested with Kaplan-Meier
estimator, while differences between groups were verified with
Fisher’s exact test or Mann-Whitney test, as appropriate. p<0.05
was considered statistically significant.
Results: 262 patients (median age 76 IQR 71-81 , M: F 23:239) were
enrolled; 4125 patients-months were observed. The majority of them
(184/262) received oTPH while the other (78/262) started bsTPH treat-
ment. The median period of observation was 18 (IQR 6-18) months. The
only differences between groups O and BS were female prevalence (162/
184 vs. 77/78; p=0.003) and median number of fractures (2 vs. 3;
p=0.0007). The overall retention rate at 12 months was 94%. In the group
BS we observed a slight higher retention rate than in group O (97% vs.
93%) but the difference was not statistically significant (p=0.15). In both
groups the main reason of discontinuation was fatigue and myalgia (prev-
alence of 4.3% vs. 2.6% respectively in group O and BS p=0.7).
Conclusion: In this cohort of severe OP patients, TPH 1 year retention
rate was higher to those reported in trials and clinical studies. There were
no differences in terms of retention rate between oTPH and bsTPH. The
availability of bsTPH will make the cost-benefit ratio of this treatment
even more advantageous by allowing more and more patients to access
bone forming strategy.
P460
IDENTIFICATION OF SUGGESTIVE CHANGES OF
INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHY IN MILD TO MODERATE
SUBACUTE POST-COVID-19 PATIENTS THROUGH
ECHOGENICITY OF THE RECTUS FEMORIS MUSCLE
R. Coronado-Zarco1, A. Olascoaga-Gómez de León1, C. Díaz-
Hernández1, H. Aguirre-Meneses1, L. E. Quintanar-Trejo1, K. Zarco-
Ordoñez1, N. C. Centeno-Morales1, X. López-Megchun1, A. Y. A.
Aragón-Hernandez1, M. A. Nuñez-Gaona1
1Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: To identify suggestive changes of inflammatory myopathy in
mild to modCerate subacute post-COVID-19 patients, through
echogenicity of the rectus femuris muscle
Methods: We considered patients with subacute (3 weeks of diagnosis)
post-COVID-19 disease, detected and treated through outpatient consul-
tation. Musculoskeletal ultrasound was performed in rectus femoris with
a standardized technique, deep was established at 6 cm and general gain at
65. We obtained, extract and analyzed transverse image of the rectus
femoris muscle with Image J software. Preprocessing of the B-mode
ultrasound images consisted in image decompression in DICOM format,
anonymization, and semi-automatic selection of the region of interest
(ROI). The distribution of the values of each pixel mapped in grayscale
is obtained from the frequency histogram for the selected ROI with 8 bits
resolution (256 gray levels). Cutoff point for increased echogenicity was
considered with the mean gray scale of 130. Statistics: quantitative and
qualitative variables were analyzed with central tendency and dispersion,
frequencies and percentages respectively. Inferences were done with chi-
square test. Authorization and registration of research and ethics
committee.
Results: We included 57 patients (29 women, 28 men) with mean age of
45.5 y (SD 12.28; range from 18-68), of which 7 patients presented
suggestive changes of myopathy (12.5%), and 9 (16.1%) with suspicion.
Women were more affected with 6 cases and 6 suspects (p=0.046). Only
17 patients referred myalgia, of which only 2 patients presented sugges-
tive changes and 2 suspected.
Conclusion: We observed that 12.5% of patients with post-COVID-19
disease presented changes in echogenicity suggestive of myopathy and
16.1% with suspicion, with greater affection in women. Patients who report
myalgia, fatigue, and weakness after COVID-19 disease may be experienc-
ing a muscular inflammatory process that could lead to fibrosis and later
degeneration. Ultrasound is a useful tool to assist timely diagnosis.
P461
CROWNED TOOTH SYNDROME: A CASE REPORT
R. Hassani1
1Chu Nedir Mohammed Unité Belloua, Service de Rhumatologie, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria
Objective: Crowned tooth syndrome is related to microcrystalline in-
volvement (hydroxyapatite or calcium pyrophosphate) of the retro-
odontoid ligament of the atlas, the manifestations of which often lead to
the erroneous diagnosis of meningitis or spondylodiscitis. We report a
new sighting.
Case report: A 36-year-old young woman, with no pathological history,
presented for a rheumatology consultation complaining of acute neck
pain with right scapulalgia of inflammatory schedule, the sudden onset
of which dates back to about 1 month, without a triggering factor or
associated signs: fever and headache. The clinical examination found a
patient in general preserved condition, afebrile. Straightness of the cervi-
cal spine with limitation of its mobility in all directions. Neurological
examination is normal. Biology: VS: 45 H1, CRP: negative; the rest of
the assessment, in particular the FNS, hepatic, renal, phosphocalcic as-
sessment is normal. Radiology: standard radiographs are not included.
The cervical tomodensitometry makes the diagnosis by objectifying a
calcification of the transverse ligament of the atlas affirming the syn-
drome of the crowned tooth.
Crowned tooth syndrome is a clinical, biological, and radiological syn-
drome characterized by inflammatory neck pain, biological inflammatory
syndrome, and calcium deposits in odontoid abarticular structures (a
crown-like calcification around the odontoid process). Note, this syn-
drome is sometimes accompanied by fever and stiffness of the neck which
can make you think of meningitis. The inflammatory indices are high, as
in most cases of microcrystalline arthritis. The CT scan of the cervical
spine centered on C1/C2 is the gold standard for positive diagnosis. The
differential diagnosis of transverse ligament calcification includes deposits
of hydroxyapatite and pseudogout. The treatment is based on NSAIDs,
±associated with a low dose and short duration corticosteroid therapy;
colchicine if NSAIDs and corticosteroids fail, inducing a dramatic im-
provement in symptoms within 48 h and resorption of calcification within
2 weeks. It is not yet clear what the exact prevalence of this syndrome is.
Conclusion: This entity remains little known after its description in 1974
by Dirheimer and Wackenheim. It deserves to be because it represents a
frequent cause of febrile neck pain.
P462
ENTHESIC RESPONSE OF THE ACHILEAN AND PATELLAR
TENDON TO PHYSICAL EXERCISE IN PATIENTS WITH
SPONDYLOARTHRITIS IN CLINICAL REMISSION
COMPARED TO HEALTHY CONTROLS
C. A. Guillén-Astete1, M. E. Tejero-Carmona2, M. Pérez-Sola2, M.
Carreiras-Cuiña2, N. García-Montes1
1Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, 2CEU San Pablo, Madrid, Spain
S253
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Entheses are the most important histopathological targets of
spondyloarthritis (EspA). Recent studies have shown that in healthy vol-
unteers, the enthesal fibrocartilage is able to adapt to mechanical stimuli.
This adaptation can lead to increased thickness of the enthesis, increased
calcium deposits or even neovascularization. In periods of remission, the
entheses of patients with SpAs should not show inflammatory changes;
however, under mechanical stress, they may behave differently from
healthy subjects, which could translate into persistent latent inflammatory
activity. The aim of the present study was to determine the differences in
the enthesis and peri-aesthetic response to physical exercise of the patellar
and Achilles tendons between patients with SpAs and healthy subjects.
Methods: Consecutive patients with a diagnosis of EspAs in clinical
remission (ASDAS <1.3 or DAPSA <4.0) were recruited from four rheu-
matology clinics and healthy volunteer controls from the Faculty of
Medicine (CEU San Pablo) and relatives matched for sex, age±4 y and
BMI category. An anthropometric study was performed on all subjects.
All were invited to perform a physical exercise consisting of 100 steps
and 50 squats over 60 min. Before and after the physical exercise, the
maximum height of the infrarotulian bursa (aBIR), height of the distal
patellar enthesis (aRD), height of the retro Achilles bursa (aBRA), height
of the effusion of the ARB (aeBRA), thickness of the Achilles enthesis
(aA) and the presence of PD signal in the Achilles and patellar enthesis
were measured. Variations in bursal heights and prevalence of PD signal
before and after were compared between patients and controls.
Results: 24 patients and 24 healthy controls were enrolled (age 43.2±5.43
y, 8 females per group; time since diagnosis 8.02±2.16 y). Controls had
greater lean mass (43.38±6.40 vs. 37.25±5.58, P=0.008) and patients,
greater Achilles enthesis thickness (8.46±1.21 vs. 7.42±0.45, P=0.001).
Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the groups. In all cases, the
height of the aRD and aBRA and the BRA occupation index increased
significantly, as shown in Table 2. The change in aBRA was significantly
greater in patients than in controls (+1.17±0.25 vs. +0.25±0.17, P<0.001),
as well as in the ARB occupancy index (28.17±7.47 vs. 16.08±5.71,
P=0.037). Table 3 exposes all the changes in the measurements, observed
in the two groups. The proportion of post-exercise PD signal in patients
and controls in the patellar tendon was 11/28 (39.3%) vs. 3/28 (12.5%),
P=0.086 and in the Achilles tendon was 12 (50%) vs. 2 (8.3%), P=0.009.
Conclusion: Physical activity of the lower body leads to distension of the
peri-aortic bursae of high-load tendons. This distension is more pro-
nounced in patients than in controls. Patients, even in remission, present
a hyperemic response to physical exercise that denotes persistence of
inflammatory activity not detectable at rest.
P463
DIFFUSE IDIOPATHIC SKELETAL HYPEROSTOSIS AND
METABOLIC DISORDERS: ABOUT 57 PATIENTS
A.-R. Halidou Idrissa1, N. Kawtar1, J. Saadia1
1Rheumatology Dept., Ibn Rochd CHU, Casablanca Faculty of Medicine
& Pharmacy, Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a nonin-
flammatory enthesopathy responsible for a musculoskeletal disorder. It
involves two (according to Forestier) or three (according to Resnick)
contiguous intervertebral bridges to affirm hyperostosis, with correct
discs (unlike spinal osteoarthritis), and the absence of fusion of the sacro-
iliacs or posterior joints (unlike spondylitis). The diagnosis of DISH is
radiological and presents with ossification of the entheses along the spine.
For some reason, the cells responsible for building bones are depositing
calcium in places where they shouldn't. No etiology has yet been deter-
mined; genetic, local, environmental and even endocrine (metabolic) fac-
tors may play a role in the development of this condition. The purpose of
this work was to study the metabolic profile of patients with DISH.
Methods: We conducted a descriptive study in the Dept. of
Rheumatology of the University Hospital of Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, from
February 2020 to March 2021 (13 months). The inclusion criteria were all
patients diagnosed with DISH according to Risnick's criteria. The exclu-
sion criteria were the patients not meeting Risnick's criteria and those
followed for a spondyloarthropathy included.
Results: 57 patients were included in this study. The average age was
64.36 (57-81), with a male predominance of 59.65%. 57.89% of the
patients (n=33) had diabetes mellitus with a mean duration of 7.12 y (4-
15), 49,12% of the cases had dyslipidemia, of whom 13 were under
medical treatment. 36.84% of the patients were hypertensive and
50.88% had an average BMI of 33.13 kg/m² (30.49-41.26).
Hyperuricemia was found in 8.77% of the patients. 56.14% of the patients
had at least two metabolic disorders, dominated by the association of
diabetes mellitus with obesity and dyslipidemia (45,61%). 11 patients
had no metabolic disorder (19.30%). The discovery of DISH was fortu-
itous in 75.44% of the cases, either following routine workup or for other
reasons. It was symptomatic in 24.66% of patients, revealed by stiffness
S254
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
of the spine. Mechanical back pain was present in 4 patients, and 7
patients had associated peripheral presentations of DISH.
Conclusion: The risk of occurrence of DISH seems to increase in patients
with associated metabolic disorders. It is a disease that progresses slowly
due to its asymptomatic feature, as noted in the vast majority of our
patients. The prevention of metabolic disorders and their control can
reduce the risk of DISH.
P464
GOUT AND PSORIASIC ARTHRITIS: A FORTUITOUS
ASSOCIATION OR A RELATED DISEASE?
A.-R. Halidou Idrissa1, N. Kawtar2, J. Saadia1
1Rheumatology Dept., Ibn Rochd CHU, Casablanca Faculty of Medicine
& Pharmacy. Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco,
Objective: Gout is an arthropathy related to an abnormality in uric acid
metabolism that causes hyperuricaemia. It is said to be "microcrystalline"
because it is due to deposits of uric acid microcrystals in tissues, espe-
cially in the joints. Gout is a chronic condition, which can lead to systemic
manifestations and severe polyarticular disease, and often responsible for
significant disability over the long term. Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a
polymorphic disease belonging to the group of spondyloarthropathies
(SpA), which is present in up to 42% of people with psoriasis and is
estimated to be prevalent at 0.1-1.0% in the general population. While
the association of gout secondary to PsA with the presence of cutaneous
psoriasis is not rare, cases of PsA without cutaneous psoriasis associated
with gouty arthropathy are less frequent and little described in the litera-
ture. We report a case of these two pathologies.
Case report: Mr S.I.K, aged 27, followed since the age of 14 for
juvenile idiopathic arthritis, treated with corticosteroids and non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The diagnosis of PsA was made
at the age of 23 according to CASPAR criteria: a chronic destruc-
tive polyarthritis that began in the lower limbs, a biological in-
flammatory syndrome, negative rheumatoid factor with predomi-
nant bone constructions in the distal interphalangeal joints (IPD)
(Figure 1). He was put on methotrexate with an initial dose of 15
mg/week, which was replaced by salazopyrine 2 g/d due of a
gastrointestinal intolerance. After 15 months, he presented with
tophi over all of the proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP) bilater-
ally. The diagnosis of gouty arthropathy was made in the pres-
ence of tophi, arthritis of the first metatarsophalangeal joints
(MTP), blood uric acid at 112 mg/L, urinary uric acid at 891
mg/24-h. In the absence of neurological and digestive signs, the
clinical profile was an enzyme drop related to a partial deficiency
in hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT),
however enzyme assay was not performed due to unavailability.
The evolution was marked by the onset of radiological destruction
of all PIPs compared to previous radiographs taken 15 months
before his admission (Figure 2). The gout attack was treated with
colchicine 1 mg/d with a good response after 7 d. The erythrocyte
sedimentation rate increased to 21mm/1st hour vs. 73mm/1st hour,
and CRP decreased from 109.34 mg/L to 13 mg/L. Then the
patient was put on febuxostat 80 mg/d, and the uric acid de-
creased from 112 mg/L to 96 mg/L after 5 d of treatment.
Regarding PsA, the patient was prescribed secukinumab.
The term of “psout” was defined by the association of PsA and gout, it is
corroborated by a common ground, pathophysiology, clinical-bio-
radiological presentation, and specific management, deserving the de-
scription of this new nosological concept. From a pathophysiological
point of view, these two diseases share autoinflammatory aspects. The
prevalence of gout is 0.9% in the French population, that of PsA is 2 to
6%, but evaluated at 18% in rheumatology consultation, making this
association a common situation. Gout is rarely due to enzymopathy,
and the best known is HGPRT deficiency. This deficit, when partial,
results in severe, early gout, tophaceae and complicated by renal lithiasis
by major hyperuricaemia. The presence of hyper uricemia is usual in
psoriasis. However, its presence before the installation of the cutaneous
and articular manifestations raises the suspicion of a fortuitous association
or infra-clinical cell turnover. Colchicine, traditionally used in the treat-
ment of gout, limits the proliferation of inflammatory cells, thus shorten-
ing the gout attack. Studies have shown that febuxostat decreases uric
acid levels to physiological levels in a higher proportion of patients than
with allopurinol with an excellent safety profile. However, the association
of PsA without associated skin psoriasis with enzymatic gout is not de-
scribed in the literature and the responsibility of gout in PsA most likely
influences the clinical and radiological outcome in patients, as suggested
by this case. The combination of these two pathologies, as in the case of
our patient, requires specific management, leading us to consider the
management protocols for each of the entities.
Conclusion: The association of an enzymatic gout with PsA is clinically
redoubtable because they are two inflammatory rheumatisms acting joint-
ly on the joints. Thus, this association might accelerate bone destruction
following an amplification of the inflammatory phenomenon by strongly
affecting the functional prognosis of the joints. The management of this
association consists in respecting the therapeutic protocols of each pathol-
ogy, imposing rigorous monitoring, both clinically and biologically.
Figure 1. Standard x-ray of the hands, showing joint space narrowing in
the metacarpophalangeal joints (3rd,4th,5th right and 2nd,3rd,4th,5th left),
joint space narrowing in all the PIP joints (1 st, 4th, 5th right and 1st, 2nd,
3rd, 4th, 5th left) and DIP joints (1st, 2nd right and 1st, 3rd, 4th left), with
anterior dislocation of the 3rd, 4th right DIP and 2nd left DIP; as well as
geodes and erosions on the interphalageal joints bilaterally.
Figure 2. X-ray taken 15 months later, when gout was discovered. Joint
destruction was more advanced on the proximal interphalangeal joints
with associated subluxation.
S255
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P465
BILATERAL HUMERAL SOLITARY BONE CYST: ABOUT A
CASE
A.-R. Halidou Idrissa1, N. Kawtar1, J. Saadia1
1Rheumatology Dept., Ibn Rochd CHU, Casablanca Faculty of Medicine
& Pharmacy, Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco
Objective: The solitary bone cyst (SBC) is a benign osteolytic bone
tumor with fluid content. It has also been described as a pseudocystic
intraosseous formation without epithelial coating, whether empty or filled
with serous or blood fluid. For some authors, this lesion is not a real bone
tumor but a benign cystic dystrophy. Usually asymptomatic, it is most
often located in the proximal metaphyseal part of the humerus and femur
in children and young adults, with a slight female predominance. In 90%
of cases, the diagnosis is essentially radiological and made during the first
two decades of life, exceptionally after 30 years. We report a case of a
bilateral SBC discovered fortuitously in a 39-year-old patient.
Case report: Mrs. C.M, aged 39, with a history of pulmonary tubercu-
losis treated 15 y ago, and type 2 diabetes mellitus under oral antidia-
betics, consulted for a mechanical pain in both of her shoulders. Standard
radiographs revealed ovoid lacunae respecting the cortical bone, with an
osteolytic feature, clear contours, and a bilateral “egg-cup shape” in the
metaphyseal-epiphyseal regions of the 2 humeral bones. These gaps were
associated with acromioclavicular osteoarthritis (Figure 1). The CT scan
confirmed the diagnosis of SBC (Figure 2). However, the pain has been
linked to the presence of chronic tendinopathies of the subscapular and
supraspinatus tendons bilaterally, as well as the right infraspinatus ten-
don, and to the presence of subacromiodeltoid bursitis in the right shoul-
der. Regarding the bone cysts, the management consisted of radiographic
monitoring with hygienic-dietetic measures in view of the risk of
fractures.
SBC is common. It ranks third in frequency among bone lesions after
non-ossifying fibroids and exostoses in the growing period. The majority
of the cysts are discovered between 5 and 15 years (60%), 10% before 5
years; some (7%) are sequelae discovered in adulthood. It is usually a
single lesion, although very rare cases of multiple locations have been
described. SBC discovered incidentally in adulthood is often an old cyst
that has migrated to the diaphyseal region. It is often latent or consolidat-
ed. Sometimes it remains in the metaphyseal region but becomes latent
with partial union and persistence of cystic lacunae, and lacunae with
fatty replacement. The patient remains completely asymptomatic until
the “inaugural fracture” or until the onset of microfractures, which gen-
erate pain. The location in the proximal humerus remains particularly
asymptomatic (because it is a nonbearing bone) until the inaugural frac-
ture, which makes it possible to make the diagnosis in 95% of cases. The
other 5% are discovered fortuitously. The x-ray is often sufficient to make
the diagnosis. CT helps in the differential diagnosis, particularly with an
aneurysmal bone cyst which has a homogeneous appearance, with or
without trabeculations. Humeral cysts that have spared the growth carti-
lage and humeral diaphyseal cysts have the best prognosis, so the absence
of growth cartilage in adulthood may explain their good prognosis. It is a
benign lesion, rarely painful or disabling. In fact, the goal of treatment is
to avoid fractures, and it should therefore be as simple and as less dam-
aging as possible. The oncological resections proposed by McNamee
ADDIN ENRfu are not justified. On the other hand, Morton offered to
give spontaneous recovery a chance if a SBC was discovered following a
fracture.
Our patient's case is rare depending on the advanced age of discovery, and
multiple locations. In addition to the fact that the humerus is a non-
bearing zone, associated with the absence of growth cartilage, our aim
was to educate the patient regarding the risk of possible fractures.
Conclusion: The discovery of a SBC in adulthood is most often fortu-
itous due to its asymptomatic clinical nature and the rarity of possible
fractures, which are the main complication. The prognosis is always bet-
ter than in children or adolescents because of the absence of growth
cartilage. This gives the bone good strength. The management may
consist in abstaining from therapy, and is based on clinical and radiolog-
ical monitoring given the risk of fracture, especially when it is a location
in a non-load bearing area (humerus).
Figure 1. Standard X-ray of the shoulders showing ovoid lacunae respect-
ing the cortical bone, with an osteolytic appearance, clear contours, and
bilateral “egg-cup shape” fundus in the metaphyseal-epiphyseal regions
of the 2 humeral bones. These gaps are associated with an
acromioclavicular arthritis.
Figure 2. CT scan of the shoulders showing well-limited osteolytic for-
mations with clear contours, respecting the cortex, and homogeneous
compartmentalized fluid content. Metaphyso-epiphyseal locations.
Typical SBC appearance.
P466
LACTOBACILLUS RHAMNOSUS ENHANCES BONE HEALTH
VIA MODULATING PERIPHERAL TREGS (PTREGS) IN
OSTEOPOROTIC MICE
A. Bhardwaj1, L. Sapra1, R. K. Srivastava1
1Osteoimmunology Lab, Dept. of Biotechnology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Objective: Probiotics are defined as viable microorganisms that upon
administration in adequate amount confer various health benefits via
modulating gut microbial composition. Very few bacterial strains have
been studied till date in relation to their effect on bone health. The de-
crease in number of Tregs leads to various inflammatory conditions of the
bone such as osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, etc. Probiotics induce the
differentiation of peripheral Treg (pTreg) cells, thereby resulting in pre-
vention of various inflammatory diseases. Based on these facts we were
interested in investigating the role of probiotics on the modulation of bone
health via its effect on pTregs. In the present study we selected
Lactobacillus rhamnosus (LR) strain of probiotics to examine its effect
on bone health in ovariectomy (Ovx) induced osteoporotic mice model.
We were interested in investigating the role of LR on modulation of bone
health (in Ovx induced osteoporotic mice model) via its effect on pTregs.
Methods: Female C57BL/6 mice were divided into three group’s (n=6/
group) viz. Sham, Ovx and Ovx+LR. LR was administered orally (109
CFU/ml) and after 45 d, mice were sacrificed and tissues were analyzed
for accessing the role of LR on bone health via various cutting-edge
technologies such as SEM, AFM, μCT, FACS and ELISA.
Results: We observed that oral administration of LR protected mice from
Ovx-induced bone loss, which was confirmed by SEM, AFM, FTIR and
μCT analysis of bone samples. We further observed that LR-intake
S256
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
enhanced bone density in both cortical and trabecular bones of Ovx mice.
Interestingly, it was observed that LR-intake enhances percentage of
CD4+Foxp3+NRP-Treg cells (pTregs) in both bone marrow (prime site
of osteoclastogenesis) and GUT lymphoid tissues (viz. mesenteric lymph
nodes, Peyer’s patches, small intestine and large intestine). Furthermore,
serum cytokine analysis revealed that Ovx mice administered with LR
had significantly decreased levels of osteoclastogenic cytokines IL-6, IL-
17 and TNFα along with significantly enhanced levels of anti-
osteoclastogenic cytokines IL-10, IL-4 and IFNγ with respect to Ovx
group.
Conclusion: Taken together our results for the first time establish an
osteoprotective role of LR on bone health via induction of pTregs in
Ovx mice.
P467
PRESCRIPTION AND USE OF ANALGESICS IN A TERTIARY
CARE HOSPITAL
C. M. Daina1, C. M. Vesa1, D. C. Zaha1, A. C. Venter1, F. L. Andronie-
Cioara1, L. G. Daina1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
Objective: The rational use of drug is one of the main objectives of
national and European drug policy. Analgesics are found in the group
of medications frequently prescribed by doctors for pain management.
Pain management in the hospital consists of the administration of drugs
with analgesic effect. Analgesics vary quite a bit. Depending on the type
and etiology of pain, the body may respond better to one painkiller than
another. Also, each person responds slightly differently to pain medica-
tion. Given these aspects, the objective of this study is to evaluate the
prescription of analgesics and the combination of analgesics at a county
hospital, in order to properly use these drugs by doctors.
Methods: A longitudinal descriptive, retrospective study was performed,
based on a quantitative research, using the computer statistical database of
the Clinical County Emergency Hospital of Oradea, in 2019. The pre-
scription and consumption of analgesics in hospital departments was
analyzed, by types of analgesics, on the medical, surgical, anesthesia
and intensive care units, surveillance unit and advanced treatment of
critical cardiac patients - USTACC, neonatology intensive care. During
the analyzed period, the hospital had 861 beds in its structure, and 39,420
cases were discharged in continuous hospitalization (19463 cases first
semester and 19957 cases second semester). It should be mentioned that
the hospital does not have an oncology department in its structure (where
the prescription of analgesics is increased). Only injectable variants of
analgesic medication were analyzed. Local analgesic drugs (patches)
were excluded from the analysis.
Results: Pain therapy in hospital is performed either using a single anal-
gesic drug or several, in variable combination. The use of analgesic as-
sociations is practiced that act through different mechanisms, the final
effect being an additive, potentiated one. The combination of three and
over three analgesics was not made at the same time, but we find the
analgesics prescribed throughout the hospitalization period. The admin-
istration of different types of analgesics to the same patient is due to the
fact that the initial therapy did not give results and, later, the treatment
continued with other analgesics. The prescription of analgesics is per-
formed as follows:
- Non-opioid analgesics are indicated in the treatment of low-intensity
pain
- mild nonopioid/opioid analgesics or combinations of paracetamol +
opioid are indicated in the treatment of moderate-intensity pain,
- Opioid analgesics are indicated in the treatment of severe pain.
Out of the total number of hospitalized patients in 2019 (39,420), 23,808
patients received at least one analgesic, which represents 60.4% of pa-
tients with analgesic treatment out of the total number of hospitalized
patients.
Conclusion: The most widely used injectable analgesic was metamizole
ampoule, with no adverse effects, according to studies and warnings
received from the National Agency for Drugs and Medical Devices
(agranulocytosis with a lethal prognosis). During the analyzed period,
the consumption of metamizole ampoules, as well as the treated patients,
decreased in number, however, metamizole ampoules still represent a
therapeutic choice of first alternative. Another commonly used analgesic
was infusion paracetamol, in which the number of indications increased
rapidly. Algifene and dexketoprofen have an upward trend both as ther-
apeutic units used and as the number of patients treated.
P468
MEDICAL SERVICES PROVIDED THROUGH HOME CARE
L. G. Daina1, C. M. Vesa1, D. C. Zaha1, F. L. Andronie-Cioara1, A. C.
Venter1, C. M. Daina1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Romania,
Oradea, Romania
Objective: Home care aims to meet the health and social needs of people
in their own homes by providing appropriate and high quality care.
People with acute and chronic conditions, who have a certain level of
dependence and have a limited capacity to go to a health unit in order to
provide the outpatient care recommended by doctors, have the right to
medical care at home. The beneficiaries of home health care services are
patients of all ages, suffering from chronic progressive, incurable or life-
threatening diseases, who have uncontrolled symptoms or psycho-social
or spiritual suffering. The purpose of the study is to evaluate the medical
services provided through home care.
Methods: The study is based on a group of 230 patients from Bihor
County, with various pathologies, who were given special care at home
by the company SC.X.SA for home medical services, for a well established
period. The analysis period was 2018-2019. This study is a retrospective
one and in order to achieve it, we analyzed the home care sheets of each
patient. The data obtained were centralized in order to analyze the patho-
logical events of the patients included in the study. In this study the eval-
uation method used was observation and the method of standardized tests.
Results: Characteristics of the analyzed group: 57% of patients are over
60 years old, 70% are men and 72% of patients come from rural areas. 30
patients live alone, without relatives (13%), 140 patients live with their
family (61%), and 60 patients are cared for by various people (26%). The
most common pathologies: oncological diseases (38%), ulcerative dis-
eases (29%) and diabetes (9%). In terms of the type of treatment applied
throughout the study, the following distribution was made: antibiotic
treatment (22%), wound toilet and local dressing (39%), continuous
blood glucose monitoring and insulin administration (7%), monitoring
of epileptic seizures (5%), oxygen therapy (10%), administration of anti-
coagulant treatment subcutaneously (17%). From the beginning of the
study until its end, a number of 80 patients were hospitalized due to their
worsening condition.
Conclusion: The need for home care is undeniable. The incidence of
pathologies whose recommendation is home care gradually increases
from birth reaching the maximum value towards the end of life, when
the patient presents a set of associated pathologies. These conditions
require specialist care for a longer period of time, which makes it neces-
sary to provide care at the patient's home.
P469
PREVALENCE OF LDL-CHOLESTEROL CONTROL
ACCORDING TO THE NEW GUIDELINES IN ELDERLY
D I A B E T E S
P A T I E N T S
W I T H
V E R Y
H I G H
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK
C. M. Vesa1, A. R. Popa2, F. L. Andronie-Cioara1, L. G. Daina1, D.
Galusca2, C. Laslau1, M. Popoviciu1, C. M. Daina1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Romania,
Oradea, Romania
S257
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Dyslipidaemia is highly prevalent in diabetes mellitus patients
and its management has been much improved in the last decades by
introduction of statins. Numerous studies demonstrate that very demand-
ing LDL-cholesterol targets are necessary in patients with very high car-
diovascular risk in order to prevent the macrovascular events. ESC/EASD
2019 consensus for diabetes and prediabetes gives a target of <55 mg/dL
for LDL-cholesterol in diabetes mellitus patients with very high cardio-
vascular risk. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the value of LDL-
cholesterol in a group of elderly patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
according to their pharmacological treatment for dyslipidaemia.
Methods: The study is a retrospective one. 145 type 2 diabetes mellitus
patients from the Clinical County Hospital of Oradea treated in the
Internal Medicine - Diabetes compartment between 1.09.2020 –
1.05.2021 were considered for inclusion in the study. Anamnesis, phys-
ical examination, assessment of cardiovascular risk factors, cardiologic
exam, diabetes duration, screening for diabetes complications, LDL-
cholesterol and investigations regarding dyslipidaemia treatment were
investigated. Their cardiovascular risk was determined according to the
definition provided by the ESC/EASD 2019 consensus on diabetes. After
applying the inclusion criteria: age ≥65 y and the presence of very high
cardiovascular risk 105 patients remained in the study.
Results: The average age of the patients was 68.5 years, there were 60
men and 45 women. 43 patients (40.95%) had a level of LDL-cholesterol
<5 5mg/dL. 35 patients (33.33%) were on high-intensity statin therapy,
among them 18 had an LDL-cholesterol <55 mg/dL (51.43% of 35). 14
patients (13,33%) were on high-intensity statin therapy + ezetimibe,
among them 10 had an LDL-cholesterol in target (71.43% of 14). 4
patients were on state-of-the-art therapy with high-intensity statin+
ezetimibe and PSCK9 inhibitor, a newly introduced therapy for LDL-
cholesterol management, among them 3 patients had LDL-cholesterol
<55 mg/dl (75% of 4). 34 patients (32.38%) were on moderate-intensity
statin therapy, among them only 12 patients had an LDL-cholesterol <55
mg/dL (35.29% of 35). 18 patients did not have any treatment for
dyslipidaemia, mostly were not aware that they suffer of dyslipidaemia,
among them none had LDL-cholesterol <55 mg/dL.
Conclusion: Screening for dyslipidaemia must be done in all diabetes
mellitus patients. High-intensity statin therapy in combination with
ezetimibe is effective in approximatively 70% of cases to achieve a target
of LDL<55 mg/dL. PCSK9 inhibitors need to be more widely use as they
appear promising for reaching a target of LDL-cholesterol <55 mg/dL in
this category of population. A periodic monitorisation of LDL-cholesterol
levels at 3 months needs to be done in all diabetes mellitus patients.
P470
I N T E R V E N T I O N
T H R E S H O L D S
( I T S )
F O R
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN: STUDY BASED ON
PHILIPPINE FRAX MODEL
J. Li-Yu1, S. Lekamwasam2
1University of Santo Tomas, Faculty of Medicine & Surgery, Manila,
Philippines, 2Faculty of Medicine, Galle, Sri Lanka
Objective: The probability of major osteoporotic (MOFP) and hip frac-
tures (HFP) derived from FRAX is widely used to identify patients with
high fracture risk. This study was designed to estimate suitable ITs for the
management of postmenopausal osteoporosis in Philippine women.
Methods: Age dependent ITs were established based on the rationale
developed by the National Osteoporosis Guideline Group in the UK
considering that if a woman with a prior fragility fracture is eligible for
treatment, then a woman with the same fracture probability but in the
absence of a previous fracture should also be eligible. ITs were calculated
for a woman of BMI 25 kg/m2 aged 40-80 y with a previous fragility
fracture sans other clinical risk factors. Fixed ITs were developed using a
database of 1500 postmenopausal women who underwent DXA as part of
routine clinical evaluation. MOFP and HFP were estimated using clinical
risk factors and femoral neck BMD as input variables. Women were
categorized to high risk and low risk groups according to the age depen-
dent ITs. ROC analyses were performed with the risk category as the
dependent variable and MOFP and HFP as independent variables. The
best cut-points (fixed ITs) were determined considering the optimum
sensitivity and specificity.
Results: The age dependent ITs of MOFP ranged from 1.8-6.9% and
HFP ranged from 0.3-3% between 40-80 y of age. MOF IT of 3.75%
and hip fracture IT of 1.25% were the best cut off values observed as the
fixed IT and noninclusion BMD in the fracture risk estimations did not
change the values. Hybrid IT for those <70 y was 3% for MOFR and 1%
for HF. For those >70 y, the ITs are age-dependent.
Conclusion: ITs estimated in the current study are concordant with those
reported from the neighboring countries. These can be used to identify
high fracture risk patients in the Philippines.
P471
INCREASED URIC ACID VALUES IN PATIENTS WITH
PSORIASIS: THE RISK OF DEVELOPING PSORIATIC
ARTHRITIS
L.-I. Suiu1, C. Criveanu2, F. A. Vreju2, A. E. Musetescu2, P. L. Ciurea2
1Doctoral School, University of Medicine & Pharmacy, 2University of
Medicine & Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Psoriatic arthritis is a chronic inflammatory joint disease,
which is part of the group of disease called spondyloarthritis, associated
in most cases with skin damage. It is known for the diversity of its onset,
evolution and response to treatment. Psoriasis is a chronic, inflammatory,
systemic disease, with skin damage and with evolutionary potential for
joint damage. The aim of this study is to identify a possible link between
hyperuricemia present in patients with psoriasis and their risk of devel-
oping psoriatic arthritis.
Methods: A group of 37 patients diagnosed with psoriasis (21 men, 16
women) was studied, of whom 13 had psoriatic arthritis. The value of
serum uric acid was measured by spectrophotometric method in all pa-
tients. The normal values are for men: <7 mg/dl, and for women: <5 mg/
dl. The age of psoriasis was also assessed, ranging from 3-10 y.
Results: Of the 24 patients in the group with psoriasis who had not
developed psoriatic arthritis, 2 (8.3%) were identified as having serum
uric acid values above normal. Of the 13 patients diagnosed with psoriatic
arthritis 3 (23%) had hyperuricemia. Two patients who had a disease
history of 3 years did not have hyperuricemia. From the rest of the pa-
tients, who had the disease of >3 y they had hyperuricemia as follows:
one (20%) at 4 y of illness, and the rest at more than 6 y of illness.
Conclusion: It is known that psoriasis is associated with elevated serum
uric acid. Following this study we can conclude that a higher percentage
of patients with psoriatic arthritis had associated hyperuricemia than pa-
tients with psoriasis who did not develop arthritis. We can also conclude
that a longer history of psoriasis could predispose the patient to hyperuri-
cemia. Therefore, this correlation may influence the evolution of patients
with psoriasis to psoriatic arthritis. More specialized studies are needed to
support these conclusions.
P472
CHRONIC FATIGUE SCORES DEPEND ON THE LEVEL OF
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN PATIENTS WITH RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS
A. V. Aleksandrov1, V. A. Aleksandrov2, M. V. Nikitin3, N. V.
Aleksandrova1
1Research Institute of Clinical & Experimental Rheumatology A.B.
Zborovsky, Volgograd, 2Volgograd State Medical University, Dept. of
Hospital Therapy, Volgograd, 3Sanatorium-Resort Complex "Vulan" -
Scientific & Clinical Branch of the FSB Institution "National Medical
Research Center for Rehabilitation and Balneology" of the Ministry of
Health of the Russian Federation, Gelendzhik, Russia
S258
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Nonpharmacological treatment strategies can be used to re-
duce chronic fatigue in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients. This study
aimed to evaluate the effect of a active lifestyle using aerobic exercise
(walking) on changes in chronic fatigue in patients with RA in the short
term.
Methods: 102 women with RA (mean age 54.8±11.3 y; duration of RA
9.5 [5;15] y; DAS28-SOE activity 2.85 [2.32;3.06] points; baseline fa-
tigue on the VAS screening scale 71.2±9.1 points) were included in the
study. Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis Fatigue Numerical Rating Scales
(BRAF-NRS V2) was used to assess fatigue, 50-m walking test was used
to assess the functional state of patients in dynamics. Patients' rehabilita-
tion program (RP) (for 21 d) included morning hygienic exercises, dosed
walking (daily, 30-60 min duration, taking into account physical exercise
tolerance according to the 6MWD test) and walking in the air for up to 3-
3.5 h/d.
Results: Patients were divided into two groups according to their level of
physical activity (according to the average number of steps walked per
day): group I (sedentary lifestyle) included patients with <5-6 thousand
steps/d; group II (active lifestyle) included patients with ≥7-8 thousand
steps/d. Physical parameters underwent significant changes in group II of
RA patients (reduction of walking time and number of steps in 50-m test:
p<0.001 and p=0.013, respectively) upon completion of RP. No signifi-
cant changes were registered in patients with sedentary lifestyle (group I)
(p=0.60 and p=0.54, respectively). In group I of RA patients, against the
background of preserved fatigue scores on the NRS-severity and NRS-
overcoming scales, there was even a slight increase in VAS fatigue
(p=0.008) and NRS-effect (p=0.01). Patients with an active lifestyle
(group II) demonstrated decreased fatigue severity on all scales: VAS
(p<0.001), NRS-severity (p<0.001), NRS effect (p<0.001), and NRS-
overcoming (p=0.001).
Conclusion: The BRAF-NRS is a useful research tool to identify the
different aspects of fatigue most affected by nonmedicinal treatments.
Increased physical activity with walking has a significant effect on fatigue
in RA, suggesting a good short-term effect of aerobic exercise.
P473
AIR POLLUTION IS A PREDICTOR OF POOR RESPONSE TO
BIOLOGICAL THERAPIES IN CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY
ARTHRITIDES
G. Adami1, A. Fassio1, E. Bertoldo1, O. Viapiana1, D. Gatti1, M. Rossini1
1Rheumatology Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Objective: There is increasing evidence that environmental air pollution
is associated with both development of chronic inflammatory arthritides
(CIA). The role of air pollutants on the treatment response of CIA (in-
cluding psoriatic arthritis [PsA] and ankylosing spondylitis [AS]) is still
unclear. The aim of the present study is to determine the association
between the concentration of air pollutants and biological drug retention
rates in CIA.
Methods: We retrieved longitudinal data of patients affected by CIA on
biological therapies and of the daily concentration of air pollutants in the
Verona area. We designed a case-crossover study to compare the expo-
sure to pollutants in the 30‐d and 60-d periods preceding a drug switch or
swap due to disease progression referent to the 30‐d and 60-d periods
preceding a visit with stable treatment for at least 6 months.
Results: 1286 patients with CIA (888 with RA, 260 with PsA and 138
with AS) with 5454 follow-up visits were included in the study. 13,636
daily air pollution records were retrieved. We found an exposure-
dependent relationship between exposure to air pollutants and CRP serum
levels in CIA. At PM10 exposures of >50 μg/m3 and >40 μg/m3 we
found a 150% and 65% higher risk of having CRP above 5 mg/L respec-
tively (OR 2.564, 95%CI 2.114-3.110 and OR 1.659, 95%CI 1.440-
1.910, respectively.). If the threshold was set at >30 μg/m3 of PM10
(below the European Union health protection limit) we still found a
38% higher risk of having altered CRP (OR 1.383, 95%CI 1.206-
1.588). Among CIA patients, 280 patients (21.7%) had at least 2
follow-up visits with at least one drug switch or swap due to drug ineffi-
cacy and one visit with stable treatment for at least 6 months, serving as
our sample for the case-crossover study. We found that air pollutants
concentrations were higher before a switch or swap due to drug inefficacy
(Figure 1A). Figure 1B shows the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve for the prediction of switch or swap due to drug
inefficacy.Discriminatory capacity of disease activity alone was the
highest (AUC 0.841) but when the prediction model included the con-
centrations of air pollutants in the 60 d before the visit the discriminatory
capacity increased (AUC 0.879).
Conclusion: We found that environmental air pollution was a determi-
nant of poor response to biological treatment in a cohort of patients with
CIA followed over a 5-y period. An intervention aimed to decrease the
fossil combustion emissions might have beneficial effects on biologics
persistence rate of patients with CIA.
Figure 1. A) Mean concentrations of air pollutants in the 60-d period
before switch or swap visit compared to the stable treatment visit.
p<0.001 between all groups. B) ROC curves for the prediction of switch
or swap due to drug inefficacy
P474
DIFFUSE IDIOPATHIC SKELETAL HYPEROSTOSIS (DISH) IS
ASSOCIATED WITH POOR PROGNOSIS IN YOUNG
PATIENTS WITH CORONARY ARTERY DISEASES (CAD)
G. Adami1, A. Fassio1, E. Bertoldo1, O. Viapiana1, D. Gatti1, M. Rossini1
1Rheumatology Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Objective: DISH has been largely associated with metabolic syndrome.
However, it is not clear if DISH poses a risk of developing cardiovascular
diseases (CVD) independently from traditional CV risk factors. In addi-
tion, an association between the extension of vertebral calcification and
the severity of CAD has never been demonstrated.
Methods: We conducted an observational study on patients undergoing
diagnostic coronarography at the cardiology department of the University
of Verona, Italy. We collected clinical and radiographical data of the
patients in the study, as well as the SYNTAX II score. The SYNTAX
II score characterizes the anatomical extent and prognosis of CAD in
terms of the number of lesions, functional importance, and complexity,
SYNTAX II >34 is commonly considered a poor prognostic factor for
revascularization. To determine the association between severity of CAD
and DISH we performed a binary logistic regression. Syntax II score with
a threshold of 34 was considered as the dependent variable, DISH and
other important CVD risk factors were considered as independent
variables.
Results: 185 patients were enrolled in the study. The mean age of the
population was 66.7 y and the vast majority were men (82.9%). 44% of
the cohort were diagnosed with DISH (definite diagnosis according to
Resnick criteria), 114 (61%) were diagnosed with standard X-rays and 73
(39%) were diagnosed using chest HRCT. Overall, DISH was associated
with an increased risk of having SYNTAX II score >34 points. In patients
aged <70 y (n 110, 58.8%) the diagnosis of DISH was associated with a
7-fold higher risk of poor prognosis on SYTNAX II score independently
S259
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
from age, sex, glomerular filtration rate, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes,
smoking status, familiarity to CVD, stroke, arterial hypertension (aOR
7.24, 95%CI 1.08-48.38, p 0.041). The extension of vertebral calcifica-
tions was associated with SYNTAX II score in all patients (rho spearman
0.378 p<0.001) and in patients aged <70 y (rho spearman 0.255 p 0.012)
(Figure).
Conclusion: In our cohort of patients at high risk of CAD, the diagnosis
of DISH was associated with complex CAD and poor prognosis indepen-
dently from traditional CVD risk factors.
Figure. Association between extent of vertebral calcifications and com-
plexity of CAD lesions (SYNTAX II Score).
P475
FRAX® PREDICTIVE ABILITY TO PREDICT MAJOR
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES AND HIP FRACTURES IN
THE SPANISH POPULATION: THE EPIFROS ASTURIAS
COHORT
M. Zwart1, R. Azagra2, A. Aguyé2, S. Tranche3, M. Saez4, G. Alvarez3, J.
Alonso3, O. Quiñones3, N. Tudela3, Y. Gil3, C. Martín3, M. Diaz-
Herrera2, P. Gabriel2
1Institut Calalà de la Salut, Girona, 2Institut Calalà de la Salut, Barcelona,
3Servicio Asturiano de Salud, Oviedo, 4University of Girona, Girona,
Spain
Objective: To assess the FRAX tool efficacy among the general popula-
tion in the north of Spain where a medium hip fracture risk has been
established.
Methods: The cohort EPIFROS-Asturias was made up of people aged
40-90 y of age. Spanish FRAX without BMD. All osteoporotic fractures
(AOF), major fractures (MOF) from FRAX 2009 data register were
analysed. Clinical risk factors (CRFs) included in FRAX were analysed
along with the number of falls over the year prior to 2019. Risk estimation
using odds ratio (OR) for variables: age (<65/≥65 y), sex (male/female),
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and others CRFs (yes/no).
Results: The CRFs showing significant differences when AOF are
analysed: age OR 2.92 (95%CI 1.07-7.99), sex: OR 3.19 (95%CI
1.25-8.16) and RA OR 10.63 (95%CI 2.03-55.55). When MOF are
analysed: age OR 4.91 (95%CI 1.10-21.90) and RA OR 18.93
(95%CI 3,50-102,39). When HF are analysed only prior fracture
OR 49.27 (95%CI 4.15-585.44). The overall predictive value obtain-
ed using FRAX without BMD for MOF was 1.4 and 0.7 for HF.
Compared with previous results in our country it seems that the pre-
dictive capacity of FRAX in Asturias is more efficient than in
Catalunya for both MOF and HF.
Conclusion: The EPIFROS cohort from the Spanish general population
shows statistically significant factor differences in ages ≥65 years old,
females and cases of RA when all fractures were analysed. The Spanish
FRAX without BMD predictive capacity used on the Asturian population
shows more accuracy than in other regions of Spain like Catalonia. This
may be due to the differences in the intermediate hip fractures risk in
Asturias as opposed to the high hip fracture risk in Catalonia.
P476
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES AND
SUBSEQUENT FRACTURES IN THE ASTURIAN REGION OF
SPAIN: THE EPIFROS COHORT
M. Zwart1, R. Azagra2, S. Tranche3, Y. Gil3, N. Tudela3, O. Quiñones3, J.
Alonso3, G. Alvarez3, M. Saez4, A. Aguyé2, C. Martín3, P. Gabriel2
1Institut Calalà de la Salut, Girona, 2Institut Calalà de la Salut, Barcelona,
3Servicio Asturiano de Salud, Oviedo, 4University of Girona, Girona,
Spain
Objective: To assess the epidemiology of osteoporotic fracture (OFx)
among people from general population in the north of Spain, where a
moderate level of hip fracture risk has been detected.
Methods: The cohort EPIFROS-Asturias was made up of people aged
40-90 years old. OFx were analysed as: all osteoporotic fractures (AOF),
major osteoporotic fractures (MOF): spine, hip, humerus and forearm in
2009-2019 period were analysed. Risk estimation using odds ratio (OR)
for variables: age (<65/≥65 y) sex (male/female).
Results: 285 individuals were included. Global age 61.5±13.9 y. 129
men (45.3%). 27 AOF (21 in women) OR 3.1 (95%CI 1.2-8.1). 17
MOF (2 in <65 y and 15 in ≥65 y). The incidence increases progressively
with age (<65/≥65 y) OR 4.9 (95%CI 1.1-21.8): 3 (20%) 65-74 y, 4
(26.7%) 75-84 y, 8 (53.3%) ≥85 y. Women with 21 AOF observed. 4
AOF in <65 y: 1 distal forearm, 1 humerus, 1 rib, 1 foot. 17 AOF ≥65 y:
11 MOF (2 spine, 2 hip, 6 forearm, 1 humerus) and 1 pelvis, 1 tibia/fibula,
2 foot, 2 ribs. 2 women had more than 1 OFx. Men with 6 AOF observed,
5 of them in ≥65 y: 3 MOF (1 spine, 1 proximal humerus, 1 forearm) and
2 tibia/fibula. 1 man suffers more than 1 OFx.
Conclusion: The epidemiology of fractures in this region of north of
Spain shows that gender and age >65 y increase the risk of fractures for
both men and women for any fracture or MOF combined. This is an
excellent opportunity to identify people at risk of fractures and to consider
the most suitable approach and treatment.
P477
FRAILTY AS A STATE OF INCREASED RISK OF FALLS IN
ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS:
THE TUGGI COHORT
M. Zwart1, L. Troyano1, A. Costa1, A. Nuñez1, E. Fuentes1, M. Ciurana1
1Institut Calalà de la Salut, Girona, Spain
Objective: To evaluate the risk of falling in frail type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
(2DM) patients.
Methods: An observational study of people aged ≥65 years old obtained
from the general population. Including criteria were: 2DM ≥65 y. One
year follow-up calls every 2 months asking for falls. Risk estimation
using odds ratio (OR) for variables: age, comorbidity, physical perfor-
mance, polypharmacy, falls.
Results :
&
107 men and women fulfilled the inclusion criteria (39% of total)
(167 excluded) with a mean age of 77±6 y. 107 (100%) Barthel ≥90.
&
46 (43%) had 2DM complications: 6 (5.61%) neuropathy, 22 (21%)
retinopathy, 8 (7.48%) altered peripheral pulses, 23 (21.5%) moder-
ate to severe kidney disease, 8 (7.48%) ischemic heart disease, 9
(8.41%) cerebrovascular disease.
&
During the follow up 27 (25.23%) (14 women, 13 men) reported
falls, 7 (6.5%) >1 fall.
&
Age ≥75 y [OR 2.71 (95%CI (1.03-7.17) p=0.04 ] and >1 2 DM
complications conditions at baseline [OR 2.52 (95%CI 1.04-6.11)
p=0.038] were associated with falls.
S260
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
&
Frailty conditions were evaluated: The Timed Up ang Go (TUG) test
≥13.5 s [OR 1.93 (95%CI 0.71-5.26) p=0.05] but it was 12.24 s and
10.37 s between fallers and non-fallers. Also remained not significant
frail Fried phenotype, Charlson comorbidity index 4, gait speed over
a distance of 4 m <cutoff point, hand grip <cutoff point, polyphar-
macy ≥5 drugs at the same time, moderate and large (Pfeiffer >4)
cognitive impairment and risk nutritional status (MNA-SF 0-11).
Conclusion: Risk of falling in 2 DM is usually multifactorial as compli-
cations of the disorder itself, frailty, comorbidities and geriatric syn-
dromes that contribute to a gait disorder. Our results have shown signif-
icant differences between fallers among advanced age ≥75 y and 2 DM
complications combined. TUG test is known to identify physical frailty
which negatively impacts the risk of falls: further studies with large pop-
ulation are required to demonstrate it in 2 DM.
P478
UROTHELIAL CARCINOMA-RELATED HYPERCALCEMIA
A. Ghemigian1, C. Chirita2, A. Goldstein3, N. Dumitru1, C. Tupea3, A.
Dumitrascu3, M. Popescu4, E. Petrova1
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, Bucharest, 2Medic Zone Centre, Bucharest,
3C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest,
4University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Malignancy-related hypercalcemia might act as an iceberg top
when it comes to detection of prior unknown cancer. Unless there is a
mammary neoplasia, the prognostic is extremely poor. Therapy is orient-
ed to control the calcium levels, also to target the potential bone metas-
tasis and, of course, to control the primary oncologic disease (1-6).
Case report: This is a 58-year-old, menopausal female, known with type
2 diabetes mellitus under oral medication, admitted for persistent asthe-
nia, fatigue, tendency to weight loss within last 2-3 months, thus a
glycaemia control was performed and found normal (101 mg/dL,
HbA1c=6.6%), but in addition to this assay, a serum total calcium was
assessed and found high 12.5 mg/dL (normal: 8.5-10.2 mg/dL) under no
oral uptake; also, suppressed PTH=6.26 pg/mL (normal: 15-65 pg/mL),
high resorption marker CrossLaps=1.03 ng/mL (normal: 0.33-0.782 ng/
mL), normal formation markers osteocalcin=30.77 ng/mL (normal: 15-46
ng/mL), P1NP=40.92 ng/mL (normal: 15-46 pg/mL), and vitamin D
insufficiency 25OHD=24 ng/mL (normal >30 ng/mL), low 24-h urinary
calcium 0.05 g/24-h (normal: 0.07-0.3 g/24-h). High erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate of 102 mm/1-h (normal <25 mm/1-h) indicated a imaging
scan, hence computed tomography was performed and found a left kid-
ney mass with retroperitoneal/adrenal infiltration of 13.53x10.65x7.6 cm,
and multiple lymph nodes and intra-arterial several thrombus at left renal
artery of maximum 1.68x1.14 cm; an osteocondensation area of
2.61x1.98x6.12 cm at the level of iliac bones, next to sacro-iliac articu-
lations. Adrenal function seemed intact – morning plasma cortisol 18.74
μg/dL (normal: 6-21 μg/dL). She was referred to oncological urology,
and urothelial carcinoma G4 was confirmed and removed, with fatal
outcome within a few weeks later.
Conclusion: Hypercalcemia accompanying aggressive carcinoma is a
warning sign, especially in the cases when the value itself is not very high
(which on the other hand, may delay the diagnostic).
References:
1. Gheorghisan-Galateanu AA, et al. Acta Endocrinologica Bucharest
2017;3:356.
2. Poiana C, et al. Maturitas 2009;62:98.
3. Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2019;70:3515.
4. Poiana C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:187.
5. Iorga AM, et al. Exp Ther Med 2020;20:2396.
6. Poiana C, et al. Gynecol Endocrinol 2010;26:617.
P479
HOSPITAL / CITY OSTEOPOROSIS PATIENT FOLLOW-UP
D. Poivret1, C. Weisslinger2, S. Desjeunes3, L. Schleck3, F. Alliot-
Launois4
1CHR Metz-Thionville, CPTS Briey, Metz, 2CHR Metz-Thionville,
Briey, 3CPTS Briey, Briey, 4AFLAR, Paris, France
Objective: Densitometric osteoporosis and fracture osteoporosis are
poorly diagnosed, assessed and treated. The creation of a day hospitali-
zation and an osteoporosis course with liberal health professionals should
make it possible to follow the patients over 4 years.
Methods: We defined a day hospitalization with an orthopedic surgeon, a
rheumatologist, a doctor responsible for medical IT, a dietitian, an occu-
pational therapist. The liberal care pathway was built around the computer
tool Parceo with 2 treating physicians, a rheumatologist, a physiothera-
pist, a dietitian, 3 nurses.
Results: 6 weeks after the fracture the patient participate 2.5 day hospital-
izations including the biological assessment, X-ray looking for vertebral
compression, dental assessment to avoid subsequent dental avulsions, a
rheumatological consultation, an individual consultation with a dietitian,
an occupational therapist, a social worker for housing development assis-
tance and a therapeutic education session on knowledge of the disease,
how to provide 1.2 g of calcium in the diet, how to fit out your home. Drug
treatment is defined by the rheumatologist and sent to the attending phy-
sician, a diphosphonate infusion is performed if this is the therapeutic
indication selected. This assessment is sent to the attending physician.
Parceo is a computer tool that makes it possible to create a professional
space in which are grouped together sheets written by each health profes-
sional for his colleagues, describing the goals and expected means in his
field of activity. Thus the dietitian described the goal of an intake of 1.2 g
of calcium in the diet by describing menus rich in calcium, the dietary
calcium intake of the patient is assessed by a questionnaire. The patient file
is opened by the attending physician which includes the history, type of
osteoporosis, clinical and laboratory data, and the proposed medical treat-
ment. Each health professional is required to enter the data he has collected
concerning his field, for example the home nurse is responsible for
assessing ground balance, the pharmacist for compliance, etc.
Conclusion: We hope to improve the diagnosis, the assessment, the
follow-up and therefore avoid the appearance of fractures in elderly peo-
ple in our territory.
P480
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT TERIPARATIDE ON DELAYED
AND NONUNION FRACTURE TREATMENT: A SYSTEMATIC
REVIEW
B. Samões1, D. Fonseca1, T. Beirão1, F. Costa1, R. Vieira1, T. Videira1, J.
Abelha-Aleixo1, P. Pinto1
1Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia e Espinho, Vila Nova de Gaia,
Portugal
Objective: To systematically identify and review literature evaluating the
efficacy and safety of teriparatide on delayed and non-union fractures.
Methods: A systematic literature search was performed in MEDLINE
using the query “"fracture" AND "nonunion" AND "teriparatide"“. All
retrieved articles were screened by title and abstract and the eligible ones
were kept for full text review. Reference lists were additionally searched.
Original research papers encompassing treatment of delayed and non-
union fractures with teriparatide in patients aged ≥18 years old were
considered for inclusion.
Results: The systematic review identified 63 search results, of which 36
were excluded after title and abstract screening because they did not fit the
purpose of the work. After full text review and addition of 5 articles from
reference lists, 28 original research papers were included: 20 case reports,
S261
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
6 case series and 2 longitudinal uncontrolled studies, in a total of 81
patients, 48 females (59.3%), with a median age [min, max] of 64 [19,
91] years old. Several fracture sites have been described, with the femur
(n=35) and the tibia (n=26) being the most frequently affected. As for
fracture mechanisms, 30 occurred after trauma and 17 were fragility frac-
tures and, 39 patients were submitted to surgery before teriparatide. The
study with the largest number of patients, however, did not describe the
mechanisms nor the number of patients with previous surgery. The me-
dian time [min, max] between initial fracture and start of teriparatide was
7 [3, 36] months. Most studies used daily injection of 20 μg teriparatide,
except 4 studies that used the weekly formulation of 56.5 μg. The median
[min, max] duration of treatment was 6 [0.8, 24] months. Overall, 77
(95.1%) had fracture union following a median [min, max] time of 7 [3,
31] months. Only 1 patient (1.2%) reported minor adverse effects with
teriparatide, although this information is missing in 22 patients. It should
be noted that in 9 patients teriparatide was combined with revision sur-
gery and in 1 patient with low intensity pulsed ultrasound.
Conclusion: Despite being an off-label use, the existing evidence
suggests that teriparatide may be effective and safe for the treatment
of delayed and nonunion fractures. However, there may be publica-
tion bias. Prospective randomized clinical trials are lacking and are
needed to confirm these results.
P481
COMORBID DISEASES IN PATIENTS WITH RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS AND OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES
P. Kozhevnikova1, I. Dydykina1, P. Kovalenko1, A. Lila1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To study and compare the frequency and structure of comor-
bid diseases in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients with and without oste-
oporotic fractures.
Methods: The study included 80 women with RA, aged 30-80 y. Mean
age 62.5±8.7 y. Mean disease duration 23.2±10.1 y. Most of the patients
had moderate RA activity (DAS28 - 3.76±1.17), positive rheumatoid
factor - 53 (66%), antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptide - 44 (55%).
All patients took a clinical examination, assessment of the anamnestic
data. Comorbidity was assessed using the cumulative disease rating scale
(CIRS) and the Charlson index (CCI).
Results: 74 (92.5%) patients had comorbidities diseases, 70% of them
had hypertension (HT), 35% ischemic heart disease (IHD), 25% obesity,
20% peptic ulcer disease (PUD), 10% diabetes mellitus (DM); the total
CIRS score and CCI were 7.21±3.21 and 4.66±1.76, respectively.
Osteoporosis had 51 (64%) patients. Among patients with comorbid dis-
eases, 36 (49%) had osteoporotic fractures. The patients were divided into
two groups: group I - 36 patients with fractures, group II - 44 patients
without fractures. Age, RA activity, disease duration, CIRS, CCI, inci-
dence rate of IHD, PUD and DM did not differ significantly between
groups. Patients of group I significantly more often had HT - 31 (86%)
vs. 25 (57%) (p=0.004), while among patients of group II there were
significantly more obese patients - 5 (14%) vs. 15 (34%) (p=0.039).
Group I patients more often used glucocorticoids (GCs) for 3 months or
more - 32 (88%) vs. 27 (61%) (p=0.004).
Conclusion: The incidence of comorbid diseases in women with RA - 74
(92.5%). Among patients with comorbidity, osteoporotic fractures had 36
(47%) patients. In comorbidity structure there was a predominance of HT,
IHD and obesity. Osteoporotic fractures are associated with HT and GCs,
while obesity may be a protective factor in the development of fractures.
P482
THE LINK BETWEEN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS AND
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
M. Ghasaboghlyan1, V. Vardanyan2, V. Mukuchyan3, S. Iritsyan4, A.
Petoyan5
1Vardanants Center for Innovative Medicine, 2Mikaelyan Institute of
Surgery, 3Erebouni Medical Center, 4Arabkir Medical Center, 5Astghik
Medical Center, Yerevan, Armenia
Objective: Autoimmune diseases are conditions during which individ-
uals develop antibodies against their cells, tissues and organ systems.
Autoimmune diseases can be either organ-specific or non-organ-
specific in their clinical presentation. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an
autoimmune disease where the body’s immune system attacks its healthy
tissues. Systemic in nature, it mainly destructively targets the joints. It is
characterized by increased levels of cytokines such as TNF. TNF appears
to have an etiologic role in thyroid dysfunction, which is a common
comorbidity in RA. Autoimmune thyroid disease (ATD) is a chronic
disease and is the most common organ-specific autoimmune disorder,
usually resulting in hypofunction of the thyroid gland. This research aims
to explore the link between RA and ATD.
Methods: During one year, 843 patients with RA, mostly females aged
42-67 y, participated in the study. 629 of them had seropositive RA and
214 had seronegative RA. Among participants with seropositive RA, 396
developed ATD unrelated to the RA treatment strategy.
Results: 63% of patients with seropositive RA developed ATD regard-
less of the RA treatment scheme.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrated an increased risk of developing
ATD in patient with seropositive RA. This association does not prove
any causality and may also reflect the inverse relationship of an increased
risk of RA in ATD patients. Further studies are warranted to explore the
causal link between the two autoimmune diseases.
P483
THE EFFICACY OF VITAMIN D USE IN PATIENTS WITH
ENDOMETRIOSIS
M. Ghasaboghlyan1, N. Ghukasyan2, A. Grigoryan1, A. Hovhannisyan1,
H. Azizyan1
1Vardanants Center for Innovative Medicine, 2Erebouni Medical Center,
Yerevan, Armenia
Objective: Endometriosis is one of the most common diseases in repro-
ductive ages. It affects patients' quality of life and fertility. Endometriosis
causes severe pain and/or infertility in reproductive women. The preva-
lence of endometriosis is known to be 2-10% in the reproductive age.
Symptoms of endometriosis are dysmenorrhea, non-cyclic pelvic pain.
One of the widely used pain scales for endometriosis-related pain is the
numeric rating scale (NRS-11) for indication of severity of dysmenorrhea.
The rating was 0 for no dysmenorrhea, 1-3 for mild dysmenorrhea, 4-6 for
moderate dysmenorrhea, and 7-10 for severe pain. Vitamin D deficiency
is an important public health problem worldwide. Epidemiological studies
showed that low D concentrations are associated with various acute and
chronic diseases. Current study aims to assess the effectiveness of vitamin
D supplementation in the complex treatment of endometriosis.
Methods: This is a prospective study with 74 participants aged 19-37
years old with documented endometriosis (endometrioma of up to 5 mm).
Vitamin D group presented with 37 patients who received PO vitamin D
of 50,000 IU twice a week, in addition to standard therapy. The control
group received only standard therapy presented with oral contraceptives
and NSAIDs as needed.
Results: Vitamin D group demonstrated a significant decrease in pain and
discomfort compared to controls. Possible mechanisms of vitamin D in
pain management are anti-inflammatory effects mediated by cytokine and
prostaglandin release and effects on T-cell responses. Of particular interest
is the recent discovery of vitamin D mediated inhibition of prostaglandin
E2, which provides a reliable mechanistic explanation.
Conclusion: Taking into account all the above mentioned, we conclude
that administration of vitamin D as a support treatment has a distinct
positive influence on patients with endometriosis.
S262
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P484
ANALYSING DUAL-ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY
IMAGES USING MACHINE LEARNING
N. Kirilov1, E. Kirilova2
1Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, 2UMBAL Dr. Georgi Stranski
Pleven, Pleven, Bulgaria
Objective: Osteoporosis is a bone disease which is diagnosed through x-
ray imaging methods such as DXA on different anatomical regions, i.e.,
hip, neck. The images acquired through DXA and their diagnostic clas-
sification is a problem, which could easily be solved using machine
learning (ML). This is achieved through model training using a known
dataset. The method uses x-ray image data on the above mentioned ana-
tomical region and uses them for diagnostic. The aim of our study is to
classify DXA images of healthy bone and such with low BMD using ML
and in that way to diagnose osteoporosis of the hip neck.
Methods: In our study we used TensorFlow and Pyhon to create a
convolutional neural network (CNN) which we consequently trained to
classify DXA images of the hip. The two classes consisted of one class of
subjects with low BMD (osteoporosis) and another class of subjects with
healthy bone (normal BMD). The dataset for training consisted of 895
images of the hip. The images were in the PNG format with dimension
800x800. The model was created with subsequent layers of nodes in the
CNN. We used the open source library for Computer Vision (OpenCV)
for image processing. The validation and training loss were graphically
visualized using matplotlib for Python.
Results: The model was trained with 671 images and then tested on 224
images, which demonstrated high accuracy and low loss function. The
achieved accuracy was almost 90% and the loss function as low as 0.05.
We used the model to classify all 895 images of the hip. The diagnosis
which the model classified for each image was compared with the actual
diagnosis from the dataset using phi coefficient. The coefficient showed
strong correlation of the predicted values with the actual ones reaching
value of 0.750. This confirmed the high accuracy of the model.
Conclusion: ML is a powerful method, which could be used in the
healthcare and medicine to help physicians make decisions regarding
diagnosis. In our study it showed its potential to predict and classify
DXA image data.
P485
RISK FACTORS FOR FRAX-ESTIMATED 10-YEAR
PROBABILITY OF MAJOR OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURE
ASSESSED WITH RADIOFREQUENCY ECHOGRAPHIC
MULTISPECTROMETRY
E. Kirilova1, N. Kirilov2
1UMBAL Dr. Georgi Stranski Pleven, Pleven, 2Medical University of
Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria
Objective: Osteoporosis is a socially significant disease with high prev-
alence, leading to fractures with great economic burden (1,2). Fracture
risk assessment tool (FRAX) is the most popular algorithm to determine
fracture risk by risk factors with or without BMD. Radiofrequency
echographic multispectrometry (REMS) is an innovative approach for
assessment of the ultrasound-based BMD (BMDUS) of the axial skeleton
with integrated FRAX software. The aim of the current study is to assess
the multivariate significant risk factors for FRAX 10-y major osteoporotic
fracture (MOF) ≥20%.
Methods: 274 women with mean age 62±12 y (range 33-88 y) underwent
REMS acquisitions with evaluation of FRAX. Patients were divided into
two groups: with FRAX 10-y major osteoporotic fracture (MOF) <20%
and with FRAX MOF ≥20%. Multivariate logistic regression analysis
was used to assess the risk factors for FRAX-estimated 10-y MOF ≥20%.
Results: Use of corticosteroids (CS), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
BMDUS of the left femoral neck (FN) were independent risk factors for
FRAX MOF ≥20% with significance of the model p=0.006. Previous
fracture increased the risk of FRAX MOF ≥20% by a factor of 38.77,
so women with a previous fracture showed about a 38.8 times higher risk
of major osteoporotic fracture than women without a previous fracture.
Women who used CS had about a 13.5-fold higher risk of major osteo-
porotic fracture than those who did not use CS. RA increased the risk by
6.92 for FRAX MOF ≥20%. Odds ratio for BMDUS of the left FN was
0.710 g/cm2 hence each 1% increase in the BMDUS of the left FN de-
creased the risk for FRAX MOF ≥20% by 0.29%.
Conclusion: Previous fractures, use of CS, RA and BMDUS of the left FN
were the only independent risk factors for FRAX-estimated 10-y MOF
≥20% assessed with REMS.
References:
1.
Vladeva S. 2014, Rheumatology aspects of the general practice.
Osteoporosis. Zhanina, Stara Zagora, 1-15.
2.
Vladeva S. 2020, The nurse as the main coordinator of post-fracture
care for osteoporosis. In Collection of Reports, "Nurses and
Midwives -Key Resource In Modern Healthcare Kota Design”
Stara Zagora, pp 41-45 IBSN: 978-954-305-570-8.
P486
TRENDS IN THE U SE OF ANTIO STEOPO RO SIS
MEDICATIONS AMONG POSTEMENOPAUSAL WOMEN:
THE NHANES 1999-2000 TO 2017-2018
H. Orces1
1Laredo Medical Center, Laredo, USA
Objective: To examine trends in the prevalence of antiosteoporosis med-
ications (AOM) use among U.S postmenopausal women between 1999-
2000 and 2017-2018.
Methods: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey cycles
1999-2000 through 2017-2018 were analyzed to examine trends in the
prevalence of AOM use among women aged 50 years and older. The
joinpoint regression software was used to detects points at which signif-
icant changes in the direction and magnitude of the trends occur over
time. The results are presented as the average annual percent change in
prevalence with their corresponding 95% confidence interval.
Results: A total 13,826 women with a mean age of 64.2 y comprised the
study sample. Of those, 6.9% were taking AOM, accounting for an esti-
mated 3.3 million postmenopausal women during the study period.
Overall, older women and non-Hispanic white had a higher prevalence of
AOM use than those who did not. Moreover, the mean use of AOM
increased from 1.4 y in 1999-2000 to 6.3 y in 2017-2018. Notably, 5.1%
of women were taking bisphosphonates, which was the most frequently
AOM prescribed (74.2%). As shown in Figure, the prevalence of AOM use
increased from 5.0% in 1999-2000 to 10.9% in 2007-2008, corresponding
to an annual percent change in prevalence rate of 12.5% (95%CI, -12.2 to
44.2%). However, from the cycle 2007-2008 onwards, a significant down-
ward trend in the prevalence of AOM use by -23.3% (95%CI, -23.3% to -
37.7%) per survey cycles occurred. Similarly, the prevalence of
bisphosphonates use increased by 9.9% (95%CI, -24.4% to 59.6%) from
2.2% in 1999-2000 to 8.0% in 2007-2008. Subsequently, the prevalence of
bisphosphonates use markedly decreased by -22.6% (95%CI, -38.8% to -
2.1%) from 8.0% in 2007-2008 to 3.7% in 2017-2018.
Conclusion: The progressive decrease in the prevalence of AOM use
among postmenopausal between 2007-2008 and 2017-2018 may be ex-
plained by a marked downward trend in the use of bisphosphonates dur-
ing the same period. Further research is needed to identify factors asso-
ciated with a low prevalence in the use of AOM.
S263
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P487
RANKL AND OSTEOPROTEGERIN ASSOCIATIONS WITH
BONE MINERAL DENSITY IN ARAB POSTMENOPAUSAL
WOMEN
S. Abdi1, E. Amer1, A. Ansari1, A. Alnaami1, K. Wani1, S. Sabico1, N.
Aljohani2, N. Al-Daghri1
1King Saud University, 2King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
This study aims to investigate the relationship between serum OPG and
RANKL with BMD in Arab postmenopausal women. In this cross-
sectional study, a total of 617 Saudi postmenopausal women were includ-
ed. Anthropometric, biochemical parameters, BMD and bone markers
were measured. RANKL was found to had a significant inverse correla-
tion with NTX in osteopenia group (r=-0.37, p<0.05). OPG was found to
be significantly and positively correlated with age in osteoporosis group
(r=0.29, p<0.05), while it was inversely correlated with BMD left (r=-
0.56, p<0.001) and BMD right (r=-0.37, p<0.05) in the same group.
RANKL/OPG ratio had a positive and significant correlation with BMI
(r=0.34, p<0.05), T-score dual left (r=0.37, p<0.05), BMD left (r=0.36,
p< 0.05) and BMD right (r=0.35, p<0.05) in osteopenia group. While it
was significantly inversely correlated with WHR in osteoporosis group
(r=-0.38, p<0.05). In multiple regression analysis, our data found that
OPG could be a contributing factor for BMD right in osteopenia group
(p=0.033). Results suggest that changes of RANKL and OPG levels
might be a protective mechanism contrary to the increased bone loss in
postmenopausal women.
P488
PTHR1 GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH OSTEOPOROSIS AMONG POSTMENOPAUSAL ARAB
WOMEN
S. Abdi1, A. Almiman1, A. Ansari1, A. Alnaami1, S. Sabico1, N.
Aljohani2, A. Alenad1, A. Alghamdi1, M. Alokail1, N. Al-Daghri1
1King Saud University, 2King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Objective: The PTH 1 receptor (PTHR1) plays a crucial role in calcium
homeostasis and bone metabolism. However, its genetic role in regulating
bone turnover markers (BTMs) in postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMO)
remains unclear. Herein, we explored PTH and PTHR gene variants
susceptibility to osteoporosis and their association with various circulat-
ing BTM and inflammatory markers in postmenopausal women of Arab
ethnicity.
Methods: In total, 600 postmenopausal Arab women (300-PMO and
300-control) were genotyped for selected SNPs in PTH (rs1459015,
rs307253, rs6054, rs307247, rs10500783 and rs10500784), PTHR1
(rs6442037, rs1138518 and rs724449 SNPs) and PTHR2 (rs9288393,
rs10497900 and rs897083). Anthropometrics, BTMs, and inflammatory
markers were measured.
Results: PTHR1 rs1138518 genotype C/T was found to be a significant
risk factor for PMO (OR=1.49, 95%CI 1.0-2.1, p=0.03). The genotypes
C/T and T/T of PTHR1 rs1138518 were associated with 25-hydroxy-
vitamin D (25(OH)D) regulation. In the PMO group, carriers of the C/T
genotype had significantly lower 25(OH)D levels (p=0.048) than carriers
of the same genotypes in the control group.
Conclusion: Our study conclude that the PTHR1 rs1138518 genotype
could be a potential risk factor for osteoporosis and 25(OH)D regulation
in Arab women with PMO.
P489
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM IN SAUDI ARABIA: A
MULTICENTER OBSERVATIONAL STUDY
Y. Al-Saleh1, A. Alsohaim1, R. Alamoudi2, A. Alqarni3, L. Mahdi1, H.
Alzanbaqi4, S. M. Nawar4, H. Alharbi4, A. Al Mullah3, M. Al Qahtani3,
B. S. Salih1, F. Al Anazi5, N. Al-Daghri6
1King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, 2King
Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, 3King Saud
bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Al Ahsa, 4King Abdullah
International Medical Research Center, Jeddah, 5Majmaah University,
Majmaah, 6King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Objective: Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is a common cause of
hypercalcemia and remains understudied within the Arabian population.
The present study, which is the largest of its kind within the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, aims to determine the demograph-
ics and clinical presentation of PHPT in Saudi Arabia.
Methods: In this multicenter retrospective study involving three tertiary
hospitals in different geographic locations of Saudi Arabia namely,
Riyadh, Al Ahsa and Jeddah, a total of 205 out of 243 confirmed PHPT
cases aged 16-93 years old were included (N=96 from Riyadh; N=59
from ALAhsa and N=50 from Jeddah). Demographics, clinical manifes-
tations, and surgical outcomes were recorded as well as laboratory and
radiologic investigations including serum PTH, 25(OH)D, adjusted cal-
cium, estimated glomerular filtration rate and nuclear scan outcome.
Results: PHPT cases appeared to increase over time when compared to
other local studies published so far. Females outnumber males (3:1) with
86% seen as outpatients. The average age was 59.8±15.5 y. Abnormal
PTH scan was seen in 171 patients (83.4%). Kidney stones was the most
common renal manifestation (32 cases, 15.6%) and selective cortical
bone loss was the most common skeletal manifestation (67 cases,
32.7%). Al Ahsa had the highest prevalence of multiple comorbidities
at 54% and the highest prevalence of obesity as a single comorbidity
(17%) compared to other regions (p<0.05). Jeddah recorded the highest
prevalence of combined selective cortical bone loss with bone and joint
pains (30%) (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Comparison of present data with previous local studies sug-
gest a surge in PHPT cases in Saudi Arabia. Regional variations in the
clinical presentation of PHPT were observed and warrant further
investigation.
P490
VITAMIN D AND DISEASE OUTCOME IN SARS-COV-2
INFECTION
L. Athanassiou1, S. Nikolakopoulou2, A. Konstantinou2, A. Spyrantis2,
O. M. Spyropoulou2, O. Mascha3, C. Samaras2, P. Athanassiou4, I.
Kostoglou-Athanassiou5
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, 2COVID-
19 Dept., Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, 3Dept. of Biochemistry,
Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, 4Dept. of Rheumatology, St. Paul's
Hospital, Thessaloniki, 5Dept. of Endocrinology, Asclepeion Hospital,
Voula, Athens, Greece
Objective: Infection with the new SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19 virus has
a variable course. It may run as a mild disease or may cause severe
S264
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
pneumonia necessitating hospitalization. Vitamin D has
immunostimulatory action and causes the release of substances necessary
for combating an infection. Therefore, the relationship of vitamin D with
the SARS-CoV-2 virus is under scientific evaluation. The aim was to
measure vitamin D levels in a cohort of patients hospitalized with
SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Methods: In a cohort of 43 patients, 20 male and 23 female, hospitalized
with the SARS-CoV-2 infection 25(OH)D3 levels were measured.
25(OH)D3 levels were also measured in a group of control subjects.
The patients were classified in 4 groups, a group with uncompromised
respiratory function (n=17 patients), a group with mild respiratory insuf-
ficiency (n=12), a group with severe respiratory insufficiency (n=5) and a
group with severe respiratory insufficiency requiring intubation (n=8).
For the evaluation of the results of the present study 25(OH)D3 levels
were classified as deficiency (0-10 ng/ml), insufficiency (10-20 ng/ml)
and sufficiency >20 ng/ml.
Results: 25(OH)D3 levels in the SARS-CoV-2 patients were 16.16±1.55
ng/ml (mean±SEM) as compared to those in the control group, 27.28
±1.94 ng/ml (p<0.001, Student’s t-test). Within the group 37 patients
finally survived the infection while 6 died either during hospitalization
or immediately thereafter. The outcome of the infection, i.e., respiratory
insufficiency or need for intubation was found to be related to the levels of
25(OH)D3 (p=0.003, chi-square test).
Conclusion: It appears that vitamin D deficiency as assessed by the
measurement of 25(OH)D3 levels is prevalent in patients with severe
SARS-CoV-2 infection requiring hospitalization. Vitamin D levels ap-
pear also to be related to the outcome of the infection. This result is in
accordance with the immunostimulatory action of vitamin D, an action
known since the very early years of its discovery.
P491
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM IN THE CONTEXT OF
LITHIUM TREATMENT: REPORT OF A CASE
I. Kostoglou-Athanassiou1, G. Giannopoulos2, L. Athanassiou3, A.
Nomikos4, A. Fortis5, T. Kalogirou5, P. Athanassiou6
1Dept. of Endocrinology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, 2Second
Dept. of Surgery, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, 3Dept. of
Rheumatology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, 4Dept. of
Pathology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, 5Second Dept. of
Medicine, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens,
6Dept. of
Rheumatology, St. Paul's Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece
Objective: Lithium is considered a mainstay treatment option for the
management of bipolar affective disorder. However, lithium administra-
tion is characterized by endocrine effects. The aim was to present the case
of a patient who was on treatment with lithium for many years for the
management of bipolar affective disorder and presented with a large
parathyroid adenoma causing clinical hyperparathyroidism with severe
hypercalcemia who was successfully treated by surgical excision of the
adenoma and hypothyroidism.
Case report: A patient, aged 68 y, presented with severe hypercalcemia,
calcium levels on admission 13 mg/dl and difficulty in walking due to
osteoporosis. PTH levels on admission were 300 pg/ml. After rehydration
and diuretic treatment for the management of hypercalcemia, cinacalcet
was administered at a dose of 30 mg twice daily for the management of
hypercalcemia. Diagnostic evaluation revealed the presence of a large
parathyroid adenoma situated inferiorly to the left thyroid lobe. Surgical
treatment was undertaken and the parathyroid adenoma was successfully
excised. Histology revealed a large cystic parathyroid adenoma. During
follow up calcium levels normalised and the patient improved clinically.
During follow up a TSH level of 6.7 mIU/L was noted. Thyroxine was
administered.
Lithium administration for the management of bipolar affective dis-
order is used successfully for many years. However, it may cause
many endocrine effects. It may cause hypothyroidism and
hypercalcemia due to hyperparathyroidism. Hypothyroidism is easily
managed by thyroxine administration. However, hyperparathyroid-
ism is usually due to one or more parathyroid adenomas or parathy-
roid hyperplasia. The optimum management of parathyroid adeno-
mas in the case of long-term lithium treatment is surgical and usually
controls hyperparathyroidism. In other reports most cases of hyper-
parathyroidism in the context of lithium treatment were due to one or
more parathyroid adenomas.
Conclusion: The case of a patient presenting with endocrine disease,
namely primary hyperparathyroidism and hypothyroidism due to long
term lithium administration is described. The disease was successfully
treated with surgical excision of the parathyroid adenoma and thyroxine
administration.
P492
MULTICENTERED JAPAN OSTEOPOROSIS LIAISON
SERVICE (JOLS) STUDY FOR PREVENTION OF
SECONDARY FRACTURE: REGISTRATION DATA
A. Suzuki1, Y. Yoshino1, T. Katogi2, N. Iinuma3, H. Yasuoka4, S. Ikeda5,
H. Ishibashi6, S. Tanaka7, H. Hagino8, H. Ohta9, T. Kurabayashi10, Y.
Takeuchi11, N. Endo12
1Dept. of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, Fujita Health
University, Toyoake, 2Dept. of Rehabilitation, Seirei Sakura Citizen
Hospital, Sakura, 3Japan Osteoporosis Foundation, Tokyo, 4Dept. of
Orthopedic Surgery, Tokorozawa Meisei Hospital, Tokorozawa, 5Dept.
of Orthopedic Surgery, Ken-Ai Memorial Hospital, Onga, 6Dept. of
Orthopedic Surgery, Ina Hospital, Ina, 7Dept. of Clinical Biostatistics,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 8School of
Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago,
9Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kawasaki Medical School
General Medical Center, Okayama, 10Dept. of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Niigata City General Hospital, Niigata, 11Toranomon
Hospital Endocrine Center, Tokyo, 12Dept. of Orthopedic Surgery,
Tsubame Rosai Hospital, Tsubame, Japan
Objective: Fracture Liaison Service (FLS) is nowadays well accepted as
effective coordinator-based system to prevent secondary fracture. Japan
Osteoporosis Society offered Osteoporosis Liaison Service (OLS) includ-
ing FLS for both primary and secondary prevention of osteoporotic frac-
ture. In this study, we focus on secondary prevention after clinical verte-
bral fracture and hip fracture to show the efficacy of FLS in super-aging
society as in Japan.
Methods: This multicentered historical-control study has been performed
in 22 hospitals and institutions in Japan. The inclusion criteria are the
newly hospitalized patients with fresh clinical vertebral fracture or hip
fracture in postmenopausal women or men equal to or above 50 years old.
Multidisciplinary team assesses the risk of osteoporosis, and educates the
patients and their family, and registers the patients in database center in
Fujita Health University during 3 months after the first fracture. The
hospital staffs send letter to each patient at 6, 12, 24 and 36 months to
check the adherence and secondary fracture.
Results: This study enrolled 1506 fracture patients (male 300/ female
1206) from 2018-2020. Their mean age was 81.6±8.5 years old. BMI
in male patients (21.3±3.2 kg/m2) was same as that in female (21.4±3.6
kg/m2). There were 618 clinical vertebral fractures (primary 329/
secondary 289) and 888 hip fractures (primary 537/secondary 351).
Patients experienced fall in the last 1 year before admission were 457
(30.3%). Multidisciplinary intervention and guidance were performed
by OLS coordinator including nurse, pharmacist, physical therapist, oc-
cupational therapist and registered dietitian.
Conclusion: This prospective study could enroll planned number of pa-
tients and is expected to provide useful information to improve FLS in
super-aging society.
S265
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P493
TEN-YEAR DIFFERENCES IN THE JOINT SPACE WIDTH
AND OSTEOPHYTE AREA OF THE KNEE JOINT:
COMPARISON BETWEEN BASELINE AND THE 4TH ROAD
STUDY SURVEYS
B. Kitamura1, T. Iidaka2, C. Horii3, S. Muraki2, H. Oka4, K. Nakamura5,
T. Akune6, T. Tanaka1, T. Rogi1, H. Shibata1, S. Tanaka3, N. Yoshimura2
1Institute for Health Care Science, Suntory Wellness Limited, Kyoto,
2Dept. of Preventive Medicine for Locomotive Organ Disorders, 22nd
Century Medical & Research Center, University of Tokyo Hospital,
Tokyo, 3Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sensory and Motor System
Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
4Dept. of Medical Research & Management for Musculoskeletal Pain,
22nd Century Medical and Research Center, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, 5Towa Hospital, Tokyo, 6National Rehabilitation Center For
Persons With Disabilities, Saitama, Japan
Objective: To elucidate differences in the joint space width and osteo-
phyte area (OPA) of the knee joints of Japanese men and women between
baseline and 4th survey data after 10 y of the population-based cohort.
Methods: The baseline survey of the Research on Osteoarthritis/
Osteoporosis Against Disability study was conducted from 2005 to
2007; 2975 participants (1041 men and 1934 women; mean age, 70.2
y) completed all examinations of knee osteoarthritis (KOA), including an
interviewer administered questionnaire and radiographic examinations of
both knees in the anteroposterior view of the weight-bearing position. The
4th survey was performed from 2015-2016; 2445 participants (764 men
and 1681 women; mean age, 68.8 y) completed assessments identical to
those at baseline. The medial minimum joint space width (mJSW) and
medial tibial OPA were measured bilaterally with the KOA computer-
aided diagnosis system (Windows program) by two observers (H.O. and
B.K.), and interobserver variability was confirmed.
Results: The mean (SD) medial mJSWs at baseline were 3.22 (0.96) mm
for men and 2.65 (0.95) mm for women and at the 4th survey were 3.81
(1.20) mm for men and 3.13 (1.15) mm for women. Compared to the
corresponding age group, the mean medial mJSW at the 4th survey tended
to be greater in both men and women of all age groups (p<0.01). The
mean OPAs in men aged 40–49 and 60–69 y and women aged 40–49,
50–59, 60–69, and 70–79 years were significantly smaller in the 4th
survey compared to the corresponding age group at baseline (p<0.05).
Conclusion: In this population-based survey, knee joint radiographic
measurements, such as the medial mJSW and OPA, tended to improve
over the 10-y interval. These changes in KOA parameters could decrease
the occurrence and progression of KOA and prevent subsequent walking
disability in the future.
P494
TBS PARAMETERS IN PATIENTS OVER 50 YEARS OLD
WITH CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE AND SECONDARY
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
N. Karlovich1, Y. Dydyshka2, T. Mokhort2, A. Shepelkevich2, N.
Vasilieva1, E. Sazonova1, V. Labashova1
1Republic Center of Endocrinology & Medical Rehabilitation,
2Belarusian State Medical University, Dept. of Endocrinology, Minsk,
Belarus
Objective: Secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT) is a universal com-
plication of chronic kidney disease (CKD), which begins to develop when
the glomerular filtration rate falls below 60 ml/min. Thus, the aim was to
study the features of trabecular bone score (TBS) in CKD patients.
Methods: This subgroup included 236 patients with CKD. Only in
33.5% (79 people) BMD corresponded to the norm, in 31.8% (75 people)
osteoporosis was detected, in 34.7% (82 people) osteopenia. The research
involved general clinic examination, serum bone-specific parameters,
DXA performed on “Prodigy Lunar”.
Results: Lower values of the bone quality were noted in women: an
absolute value of TBS (1.25 (1.15–1.35) vs. 1.33 (1.22–1.44), U=2477;
p=0.009) and the T-score (–0.50 (–1.60–0.50) vs. 0.00 (–1.00–1.00),
U=2545; p=0.045). SHPT was confirmed in 31.4% (74 people), includ-
ing 35.9% (33 people) of men and 28.5% (41 people) women.
Comparative analysis of the BMD decreases in the regions confirmed
the predominant decrease in the mineral component in the femoral neck
and lower third of the radius as in the general subgroup with CKD
(n=236, x2=245.3 p<0.001) and in SHPT subgroup (n=74, x2=69.6; p
0.001). Only 36.3% (37 women) had a normal trabecular bone structure,
in 22.5% (23 women) partial violations of microarchitectonics were not-
ed, and 41.2% (42 women) had pronounced violations of the quality. In
persons with SHPT lower TBS values were determined, without statisti-
cal significance of differences: n=166 1.26 (1.11-1.40) vs. 1.27 (1.20-
1.37), U=2773, p=0.388. There was a tendency towards a decrease in
TBS with the progression of CKD (x2=2.37; p=0.795). A significant
minimum value of TBS was established if the cause of CKD was a
congenital anomaly of the urinary tract both in the general subgroup with
CKD (x2=13.8; p=0.017) and in the SHPT subgroup (x2=13.3; p=0.021).
Conclusion: CKD has a negative impact on the qualitative and quantita-
tive parameters of bone in patients over 50 years of age. At the same time,
there are significant differences in parameters taking into account gender,
which requires further research.
P495
WHERE HAVE THE FRAILTY PERTROCHANTERIC
FRACTURES GONE?
B. A. Bitzidis1, S. S. Spanou2, S. A. Samaras1
1Dept. of Trauma & Orthopaedics, Mpodosakeio General Hospital,
2Dept. of Paediatrics, Mpodosakeio General Hospital, Ptolemaida,
Greece
Objective: To evaluate the attendance of patients presenting in our insti-
tution with a frailty pertrochanteric hip fracture during the COVID-19
pandemic and the imposed quarantine and curfew and compare the results
with the ones of the previous 5 y.
Methods: Retrospectively we checked the hospital's archives for a total
period of 1 y, and from March 2020 until March 2021, regarding the
patients admitted in the orthopaedic department diagnosed with a frailty
pertrochanteric hip fracture during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Results:
Pertrochanteric
hip fracture
March 2015-
March 2016
March 2016-
March 2017
March 2017-
March 2018
March 2018-
March 2019
March 2019-
March 2020
COVID-19
Pandemic
Total
Operative
treatment
50
52
56
58
51
34
301
Conservative
treatment
3
4
7
8
7
6
35
S266
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: The results of our data review regarding the attendance of
patients with a frailty pertrochanteric fracture in our institution over the
last 5 y show an important decline during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our
hospital is a COVID-19 reference institution and covers an area of
150.000 citizens in the northwestern part of Greece and the population
has a steady number over the last years. The frailty pertrochanteric frac-
tures are considered to be sustained mainly at home or during activities
nearby due to the patients’ limited mobility and also due to the quarantine
and the curfew during the pandemic, the transfer of patients to other
hospitals in other areas was not possible so the question of where all the
frailty hip fractures have gone during this period of time is an update
which still finds answers. Furthermore, an important question arises
now while the society is trying to find its way back to normality, whether
the attendance of patients with frailty pertrochanteric hip fractures will
present an increase in numbers over the next period of time.
P496
THE EFFECT OF REGION OF INTEREST ON THE
MEASUREMENTS OF BONE MINERAL DENSITY OF THE
PROXIMAL FEMUR
K. Uemura1, M. Takao1, Y. Otake2, H. Hamada1, W. Ando1, Y. Sato2, N.
Sugano1
1Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 2Nara Institute of
Science & Technology, Ikoma, Japan
Objective: The BMD of the proximal femur is usually measured using the
DXA at the region between the head-neck junction and the distal of the lesser
trochanter. While some studies reported the effect of the region of interest
(ROI) setting on the BMD measurements, limited information has been pro-
vided regarding the degree of change in BMD caused by the alteration of the
ROI. In this study, we performed a simulation analysis using CT images to
clarify the effect of changing the ROI on the measurement of the BMD.
Methods: Hip CT images of 75 women (mean age: 62.4 y) were analyzed
herein. After the volume of the proximal femur was isolated from the CT
images, the volume was rotated to account for the positional variance found
during CT imaging. Then, the volume was projected towards the
anteroposterior direction to generate a simulated DXA image used for
analysis (Fig. a). For the simulated DXA image, the neck cut was simulated
0-10 mm distal from the head-neck junction, and the distal cut was simu-
lated 0-40 mm distal from the tip of the lesser trochanter. The cut level was
altered with a 1mm increment to create each ROI, and the mean density/
pixel of each ROI was quantified as the BMD. The BMD of each ROI was
compared with that at a cut level of 0 mm, and the percent changes were
calculated. Analyses were performed automatically using MATLAB.
Results: An absolute maximum change of 1.6% was found for the neck
cut when the cut level was 10 mm distal from the head-neck junction (Fig.
b). For the distal cut, the BMD increased linearly as the cut level was
transferred distally. The changes were 5.5% at 10 mm, 11.8% at 20 mm,
18.7% at 30 mm, and 25.4% at 40 mm (Fig. c).
Conclusion:SmallchangesinBMDwerefoundwhentheneckcutlevelwas
altered. On the contrary, BMD changed substantially when the distal femur
cut level was altered. We recommend confirming the ROI of the distal femur
when the BMD changed significantly from the previous measurements.
Figure. Simulated DXA image (a), results of the neck cut simulation (b),
and results of the distal cut simulation.
P497
MODELLING OF LEAN AND FAT ARTIFACTS ON
TRABECULAR BONE SCORE USING A DXA PHANTOM
C. Kam1, M. Almohaya2, S. Bhullar1, D. Kendler3
1Prohealth Clinical Research, Vancouver, Canada, 2King Fahad Medical
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada
Objective: Trabecular bone score (TBS) software analyzes image pat-
terns from lumbar spine DXA to evaluate the architecture of trabecular
bone. TBS is an independent predictor of fracture risk and can be used to
adjust FRAX absolute fracture risk assessments. Low TBS values indi-
cate deteriorated trabecular microarchitecture. TBS has limitations and
cannot be used in patients who are overweight or underweight. In over-
weight patients, there may be deterioration of image quality due to in-
creases in abdominal thickness. We studied the effect on TBS of increas-
ing fat and water overlying the Hologic spine phantom region of interest
(ROI) and/or reference area (ref).
Methods: Varying depths of water or fat were placed overlying the ROI
and ref areas of the Hologic spine phantom, scanning on a Hologic
Discovery densitometer. Both vegetable oil in plastic trays and 6.5 cm
thickness blocks of lard were used to model overlying fat; trays of water
were used to model overlying lean.
Results: There was severe degradation of DXA image quality and ROI
edge detection when 13 cm of lard was placed over the ROI. Increasing
from 0 cm to 8 cm of oil over both the ROI and ref area led to linear
decreases in TBS (with 8 cm oil, decreases of 10.8%, Pearson r=-0.98).
Increasing from 0 cm to 8 cm of oil over the ROI alone led to linear
decreases in TBS (with 8 cm oil, decreases of 24.7%; r=-0.99).
Increasing from 0 cm to 8 cm of oil over the ref area alone led to pro-
gressive increases in TBS (with 8 cm oil, increases of 4.1%; r=0.98).
Trays of water overlying the ROI and the ref area introduced much less
artifact than trays of vegetable oil.
Conclusion: Increasing thickness of fat over ROI, ref, and both the ROI
and ref areas introduces a significant artifact to TBS results. Artifact is
much less with water than with oil. Documenting these artifacts may help
to understand changes in TBS results in patients with marked changes in
body weight.
P498
DEVELOPMENT OF A REPRODUCIBLE RESEARCH
PLATFORM TO ASSESS BONE MINERAL DENSITY OF THE
PROXIMAL FEMUR FROM CLINICAL CT IMAGES
K. Uemura1, Y. Otake2, M. Takao1, H. Makino2, M. Soufi2, N. Sugano1,
Y. Sato2
1Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 2Nara Institute of
Science & Technology, Ikoma, Japan
Objective: Quantitative CT (QCT) can be employed as a substitute for
DXA in measuring proximal femur BMD. However, commercially avail-
able software that is not accessible from all institutions is needed to
diagnose osteoporosis from QCT. We therefore aimed to 1) develop an
open source reproducible research platform that quantifies BMD from CT
images and 2) validate its accuracy.
Methods: This study analyzed 75 pairs of hip CT and DXA images of
women with a diagnosis of osteoporosis (25 hips), osteopenia (25 hips),
and normal (25 hips), according to the T-score calculated from the DXA
measurements of the proximal femur (DXA-BMD). From the CT images,
the femur and a calibration phantom were automatically segmented using
pretrained codes/models available at https://github.com/keisuke-uemura
(Fig). The proximal femoral region was isolated by manually selected
landmarks, and the mean Hounsfield units within the region was quanti-
fied (CT-vHU, Fig: upper row). The region was projected onto the coro-
nal plane to measure the areal density (CT-aHU, Fig: lower row). The
calibration phantom was employed to convert the CT-vHU into
S267
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
CT-vBMD and the CT-aHU into CT-aBMD. Each parameter was corre-
lated to the DXA-BMD, and the accuracy in diagnosing osteoporosis was
quantified by a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis.
Results: The correlation coefficients between the four parameters and
DXA-BMD were all ≥0.9 (all p<0.001). In the ROC analysis, the area
under the curve (AUC) for diagnosing osteoporosis was ≥0.96 for all
parameters.
Conclusion: Quantification of proximal femur BMD and diagnosis of
osteoporosis from CT images were accurately performed with the system
developed in this study. Given that the models necessary for segmentation
are open source, researchers may apply this reproducible platform for
quantifying proximal femur BMD.
Figure. Flowchart for quantifying the CT-vHU, CT-vBMD, CT-aHU,
and CT-aBMD of the proximal femur from CT images.
P499
FAT AND LEAN ARTIFACTS OVER REGION OF INTEREST
AND REFERENCE AREA OF SCANS OF A DXA PHANTOM
M. Almohaya1, C. Kam2, S. Bhullar2, D. Kendler3
1King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Prohealth Clinical
Research, Vancouver, Canada, 3University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada
Objective: Body weight is correlated with BMD; weight changes may
alter DXA-measured bone mass due to artifact and imprecision in addi-
tion to real changes in bone mineral content (BMC). DXA instruments
compare BMC over the bone region of interest (ROI) with a reference
area (ref) where bone is absent. Artifact may originate from changes in the
ROI, the ref area, or both. We modeled the effects of changes of lean and
fat overlying the ROI and overlying the ref area.
Methods: Vegetable oil and water in plastic trays and 6.5 cm blocks of
lard of increasing mass were placed over the Hologic spine phantom,
tested on a Hologic Discovery densitometer. Each phantom was scanned
in triplicate with fat or water overlying the ROI, the ref area and both.
Results: Placing blocks of lard and oil on the phantom overlying the ROI
resultedindecreasesinBMC,areaandBMDvalues(Pearsonr=-0.99forall).
With 13 cm lard, BMD decreased 37% (from 0.903 g/cm2 to 0.572 g/cm2).
Lesser changes were observed with increases from 0 cm to 8 cm of water
(BMD decreased by 1.9% with water and 10.5% with oil). BMD increased
with increasing thickness of lard and oil overlying the ref area (8.8% with
13 cm of lard and 7.3% with 8 cm of oil, r=0.98) and decreased 1.7% (r=-
0.81) with overlying 8 cm of water. Placing blocks of lard and oil overlying
both ROI and ref areas resulted in decreases in both BMC and BMD (BMD
r=-0.94 for lard and r=-0.97 for oil). Water placed over ROI and ref resulted
in small increases in BMC and BMD (0.2% and 1% respectively).
Conclusion: Fat over both ROI and ref area leads to artifact in both ROI
area and BMC. Increasing thickness of fat leads to progressive decreases
in BMD. There is less artifact with increasing depth of water compared to
fat. These data may help understand the DXA artifact introduced with
changes in patient weight in patients monitored with DXA.
P500
ASSESSMENT OF BONE QUALITY IN YOUNG ADULTS WITH
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEA SE AND SECONDAR Y
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Y. Dydyshka1, N. Karlovich2, A. Shepelkevich1, N. Vasilieva2, V.
Vadzianava3, E. Brutskaya-Stempkovskaya4
1Belarusian State Medical University, Dept. of Endocrinology, 2Republic
Center of Endocrinology & Medical Rehabilitation, 3Belarusian Medical
Academy of Postgraduate Education, 4Belarusian State Medical
University, Dept. of General Medical Practice, Minsk, Belarus
Objective: The negative effect of secondary hyperparathyroidism
(SHPT), including in chronic kidney disease, on bone metabolism is
undoubtedly an increase in PTH alters the processes of mineralization
and bone metabolism in general, increases the risk of bone fractures,
and metastatic calcification is formed. Thus, the aim was to study the
features of trabecular bone score (TBS) in young adults with CKD
patients.
Methods: This subgroup included 213 patients with CKD and 34 people
in the control group, SHPT was determined in 39.0% (83 people) of
patients in the main group. The research involved general clinic exami-
nation, serum bone-specific parameters, DXA (BMD) and TBS of lumbar
spine) performed on “Prodigy Lunar”. Z-score of –2.0 or less was
regarded as low BMD. The TBS was performed in absolute units (gray
scale pixel deviation) of the lumbar spine L1-L4 and Z-score TBS were
also taken into account.
Results: Low bone mass was detected in 32.7% (70 people) of the exam-
ined patients. According to the results of the study, a decrease in TBS (L1-
L4) (1.36 (1.24–1.44) vs. 1,44 (1.40–1.49), U=1211; p<0.001) and Z-score
TBS (L1-L4) (-0,60 (-2.00–0.00) vs. 0.10 (-0,2.0–0.70), U=545; p=0,001)
was noted in patients with CKD compared with controls. There were no
significant differences in the parameters of BMD and TBS in men and
women in both the main and control groups, which makes it possible to
evaluate these parameters without dividing by gender. There was established
a direct moderate statistically significant relationship between TBS and
BMD of the lumbar spine in patients with CKD (ρ=0.40; p<0.001). In
patients with SHPT, lower TBS values were determined (1.32 (1.22–1.12)
vs. 1.39 (1.28–1.45), U=2031; p=0.078). Young adults with CKD
(X2=7,805; р=0.050), including those with SHPT (X2=2.620; р=0.270),
showed a decrease in TBS with decreasing GFR, but not in dialysis patients.
Conclusion: Young adults with hyperparathyroidism have lower param-
eters of bone quality. The absence of gender differences may indicate the
specificity of the effect on bone metabolism of the underlying disease.
P501
TREATMENT OF CUTIBACTERIUM ACNES INFECTION
RESULTING IN PROSTHETIC PROTRUSIO ACETABULI
W. L. P. Yuen1, R. Raghuraman1, E. D. Omar Mohamed Hussein1, L.
Cheng Kiang Adrian1
1Changi General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore
Objective: As we face an increasingly aging population, more and more
arthroplasty surgeries are performed. Hip bipolar hemiarthroplasty is
commonly done for elderly patients who suffer from femoral neck frac-
tures, with good functional outcomes.1 Amongst the complications of hip
bipolar hemiarthroplasty surgery, prosthetic acetabular protrusio is rare. It
is thought to occur in prosthetic joint infections (PJI) due to destructive
osteolysis and resorption of surrounding bone resulting in prosthesis mi-
gration.2 Amongst prosthetic joint infection pathogens, Cutibacterium
acnes is increasingly being implicated. It typically results in infections
via biofilm production and has an indolent and nonspecific clinical pre-
sentation. It can cause significant soft tissue damage and unstable im-
plants.3 There is no gold standard for treatment of C. acnes infections
yet, and we seek to contribute to current literature regarding C. acnes PJI.
S268
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: We review the current literature surrounding the treatment of
C. acnes prosthetic infections, and also discuss the treatment of a chal-
lenging case of C. acnes infection resulting in prosthetic protrusio
acetabuli.
Results: Our patient was successfully treated with antibiotic treatment
and a two-staged revision total hip arthroplasty, and recovered well
postoperatively.
Conclusion: PJIs continue to increase as more arthroplasty surgeries are
done for an increasingly elderly population. We report a PJI case which
contributes to literature on C. acnes infections and prosthetic acetabular
protrusio.
References:
1. Wang F, et al. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2015;16:229.
2. Stiehl JB. J Arthroplasty 2007;22:283.
3. Boisrenoult P. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res 2018;104:S19.
P502
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE FOR ALL-INSIDE REPAIR OF
BUCKET-HANDLE MENISCAL TEARS
W. L. P. Yuen1, C. L. Kuo1, K. M. J. Goh1, Y. H. D. Lee1
1Changi General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore
Objective: Bucket-handle meniscal tears (BHMT) remain challenging to
manage due to their complex pathology and technical difficulty. Subtotal
meniscectomy has been shown to improve symptoms but leads to accel-
erated osteoarthritis in the affected compartment and poorer long-term
outcomes.1 BHMT repair and meniscal preservation is hence the pre-
ferred option. It can be done via inside-out, all-inside, or hybrid meniscus
repair techniques. All-inside meniscus repair avoids the need for addi-
tional safety incisions, trained assistants for suture passing, and reduce
concerns of soft-tissue and neurovascular complications.2 We present our
technique for all-inside BHMT repair.
Methods: We utilize the all-inside device (FAST-FIX 360 Meniscal
Repair System from Smith and Nephew) for successful all-inside
BHMT repair. Good anatomical reduction of the BHMT can be achieved
via adequate release of perimeniscal scar tissue, and assisted with an
inside-out reduction stitch. Both horizontal and vertical stitch configura-
tions are used for the all-inside repair with the depth limiter of the device
set at 16 mm for the meniscus body and 18mm for the posterior horn. We
place at least five to six all-inside stitches at intervals of 3-5 mm for
adequate repair of the BHMT, with a vertical stitch placed at the edge
of the tear to prevent tear propagation.
Results: Good long-term outcomes have been shown for BHMT for all-
inside techniques.2 We demonstrate our all-inside technique, and share
out tips for technical success.
Conclusion: All-inside repair of BHMT can achieve good outcomes. We
present our technique for all-inside BHMT, emphasizing good reduction
and stable fragment fixation. This will shorten surgery time, reduce com-
plications, and provide predictable outcomes.
References:
1. Stein T, et al. Am J Sports Med. Published online 2010;38:1542.
2. Tengrootenhuysen M, et al. Knee Surgery Sport Traumatol Arthrosc
2011;19:236.
P503
HIGH-INTENSITY LASER IN THE TREATMENT OF
OSTEOARTHRITIS OF THE KNEE
V. Koevska1, B. Mitrevska1
1University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Medical faculty, Skopje,
Macedonia
Objective: Osteoarthritis of the knee is associated with the aging process.
Genetic factor, body weight, previous knee injury, etc. also play an im-
portant role in the pathogenesis. In addition to traditional physical
therapy, one of the possible modalities is the high-intensity laser treatment
(VILT). This study aimed to show the role of VILT in osteoarthritis of the
knee.
Methods: The study involved 36 patients, 23 (63.89%) women and 13
(36.11%) men, who were treated by the institute with VILT. For the
application of VILT, a standardized protocol presented in the device
was applied, every day, for a total 10 d. WOMAC was used to assess
functional ability at baseline, 10 d and 1 month after treatment.
Results: There was no significant difference in the mean age p=0.7105
and BMI p=0.6162. We found that in the WILT group the height of the
WOMAC index significantly decreased from 0-time to 1 month with a
significantly lowest value after 1 month (p=0.00001).
Conclusion: VILT has a significant role in reducing pain and improving
functional ability in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee.
P504
THE EFFECTS OF MESENCHYMAL STEM CELL INJECTION
ON THE 15TH DAY AFTER IMPLANTATION OF OK-015 INTO
THE TIBIA ON GROWTH RATE OF THE LOWER INCISORS
K. Ismailova1, V. Luzin1, S. Trufanov1, D. Astrakhantsev1
1State Establishment of Lugansk People’s Republic Saint Luka Lugansk
State Medical University, Lugansk, Ukraine
Objective: To investigate growth of the lower incisors (LI) in rats after
injection allogenic stem cells (ASC) on the 15th day after implantation of
hydroxyapatite material OK-015 into the tibia.
Methods: 150 male rats with body weight of 190-225 g were used. Group
K comprised the intact controls, group D comprised animals with 2 mm
opening in the proximal part of the tibiae. Group OK consisted of the
animals with the openings in the tibiae filled with material OK-015. In the
group MSC15D and MSC15OK animals received injections of 5E6 ASC
on 15th day after intervention. ASC were obtained from red bone marrow
from donor animals. After 7, 15, 30, 60 and 90 d after intervention LI were
excised and prepared for gross morphometry with 0.05 mm precision.
ANOVA and other tests were performed with the use of standard software.
Results: LI length in the group D was lower than that of the controls from
the 15th to the 90th day by 4.59%, 5.98%, 4.86%, and 4,28%. Width of the
LI was lower from the 15th to the 60th day by 10,00%, 9,88%, and 6,10%.
In the group OK by the 7th and the 15th days the LI shortened by 3,33%
and 3,83% (in comparison with the group D). Width in the same period
decreased by 6.39% and 5.83% and height – by 5.60% and 4.76%. In later
terms growth of the incisor accelerated. In group MSC15D from the 30th
to the 90th day length of the LI increased by 3.87%, 2.99%, and 3,63%;
height of the LI increased by 6.85% on the 30th day. In MSC15OK group
width and height of the LI increased in comparison with OK group by
4.15% and 5.33% on the 30th day.
Conclusion: Injection of ASC on the 15th day after implantation of OK-
015 into the tibia reduces adverse effects of intervention on LI growth.
This is manifested as increase of LI dimensions in the group MSC15D in
comparison with D group in the period from the 30th to the 90th day. Same
effects were observed in MSC15OK group in comparison with OK-015
group yet in the period from the 30th to the 60th day after intervention.
P505
ULCERATIVE COLITIS AS A CAUSE OF HIP FRACTURE
L. Athanassiou1, I. Kostoglou-Athanassiou2, M. Nikolidaki3, D.
Mathiou3, P. Giavopoulos4, A. Samolis4, P. Athanassiou5, G. Troupis4
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, Greece,
2Dept. of Endocrinology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, Greece,
3European University Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Dept. of Anatomy,
Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 5Dept. of
Rheumatology, St. Paul's Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece
Objective: Ulcerative colitis is an autoimmune inflammatory disease
which affects the intestine and induces chronic inflammation and
S269
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
symptoms such as pain and bowel movement disturbance. The aim was to
describe the case of a patient, male, age 67 y who suffered from inflam-
matory bowel disease and presented with a hip fracture.
Case report: The case of a patient, male, aged 67 years who suffered
from inflammatory bowel disease is described. The disease was well
controlled on treatment with mesalazine. No disease recurrence had been
observed for many years. He was on treatment with cholecalciferol and
25(OH)D3 levels were within normal range at various time points in the
past. Testosterone levels were within normal range. The patient had a
right hip fracture after a fall from his own height. The hip fracture was
successfully managed by surgery. Subsequently, a diagnostic control for
osteoporosis revealed a T-score of -2.7 in the left hip and a 25(OH)D3
level of 31.2 ng/ml. Alendronate was administered along with calcium
and cholecalciferol orally. Thereafter, zoledronic acid was administered
iv. Alendronate was discontinued and alphacalcidol orally was initiated.
Conclusion: Ulcerative colitis, even if adequately controlled on mild
drug treatment and even if the patient is on adequate treatment with
cholecalciferol seems to affect bone metabolism and may induce osteo-
porosis. Osteoporosis in the context of ulcerative colitis may be due to the
circulation of inflammatory cytokines which affect bone metabolism and
induce decreased BMD. Decreased BMD in a patient with inflammatory
bowel disease may also be due to altered mucosal absorption of salts and
vitamins. Therefore, osteoporosis in the context of inflammatory bowel
disease should be managed promptly and aggressively.
P506
FRACTURE OF THE PUBIC RAMUS AS PRESENTING
MANIFESTATION OF POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS
L. Athanassiou1, I. Kostoglou-Athanassiou2, D. Mathiou3, M.
Nikolidaki3, A. Pastroudis4, A. Samolis5, P. Giavopoulos5, P.
Athanassiou6, G. Troupis5
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, Greece,
2Dept. of Endocrinology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, Greece,
3European University Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 46th Dept. of
Orthopedics, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, Greece, 5Dept. of
Anatomy, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece,
6Dept. of Rheumatology, St. Paul's Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece
Objective: Fractures of the pubic ramus are relatively rare. They have
been described as traumatic fractures in cases of gunshot injury and after
accidents in young patients. They may also occur as stress fractures. The
aim was to describe the case of a patient, female, who underwent hyster-
ectomy and ovariectomy at the age of 45 and presented with osteoporosis
and a pubic ramus fracture as a presenting manifestation of osteoporosis.
Case report: A female, aged 55 y who presented with a left sided pubic
ramus fracture and a left sided fracture of the sacrum after a fall is de-
scribed. The patient had been subjected to hysterectomy along with ovari-
ectomy at the age of 45 y. After the operation she was not offered pre-
ventive treatment for osteoporosis. 10 y later and after a fall she presented
with a left sided pubic ramus fracture and a fracture of the left side of the
sacrum. She was managed conservatively. Consequently, the patient was
investigated for osteoporosis. T-score of the lumbar spine was -2.6.
Alendronate was administered for the management of osteoporosis.
Fractures of the pubic ramus are relatively rare. They are often observed
in young patients after injury or as stress fractures following intense
exercise. The development of pubic ramus fractures in the context of
osteoporosis and especially as a presenting manifestation of postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis is rare. The diagnosis of a pubic ramus fracture is
difficult and requires intense clinical suspicion. Radiological investiga-
tion which may be complemented by bone scintigraphy and computed
tomography may be required for early diagnosis. Pubic ramus fractures
cause intense inguinal or hip pain and may induce limping. They are
managed conservatively.
Conclusion: The case of a patient is described in which the first mani-
festation of postmenopausal osteoporosis was a pubic ramus fracture.
P507
ASSESSING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF BISPHOSPHONATES
FOR THE PREVENTION OF FRAGILITY FRACTURES: AN
UPDATED SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND NETWORK META-
ANALYSES
A. Bastounis1, T. Langley1, S. Davis2, Z. Paskins3, N. Gittoes4, J.
Leonardi-Bee1, O. Sahota5
1Division of Epidemiology & Public Health, School of Medicine,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 2School of Health & Related
Research, Regent Court (ScHARR), University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
UK, 3Haywood Academic Rheumatology Centre, Midlands Partnership
NHS Foundation Trust & School of Medicine, Keele University, Stoke-
on-Trent, 4Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, University
of Birmingham & Queen Elizabeth Hospital, University Hospitals
Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, 5Queens Medical
Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham University Hospitals
NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK
Objective: Bisphosphonates have been found to be effective in prevent-
ing fragility fractures, but, as with all pharmacological agents, their
benefit-to-risk ratio must be considered in the round. In light of recent
clinical trials, there is a need to update the estimates regarding their com-
parative effectiveness in preventing fragility fractures. This is an update
of a systematic review previously published as part of a NICE HTA
report. This study aimed to update the estimates regarding the clinical
effectiveness and safety of bisphosphonates (alendronate, risedronate,
ibandronate, and zoledronate) for the prevention of fragility fractures.
Methods: Searches of 14 databases, unpublished sources and trial regis-
tries were conducted, covering the period 2014 to March 2021. Screening,
data extraction and risk of bias assessment were independently undertaken
by two study authors. Data was analysed using NMA embedded within a
Bayesian framework. Outcomes were fractures, femoral neck BMD, mor-
tality, adverse events and health-related quality of life.
Results: 25 additional eligible trials were identified, resulting in a total
population of 47,007 participants. Overall, 34 trials provided data for the
fracture NMA and 44 trials provided data for the BMD NMA. All treat-
ments had beneficial effects on fractures vs. placebo with hazard ratios
varying from 0.38 (95%CI: 0.28, 0.49) to 0.77 (95%CI: 0.63, 0.91) for
zoledronate and alendronate respectively. All treatments were associated
with increases in BMD vs. placebo with mean percentage differences rang-
ing from 2.25 (95%CI: 1.61, 2.87) to 4.02 (95%CI: 3.2, 4.84) for
risedronate and zoledronate respectively.
Conclusion: Zoledronate was found to be the most effective treatment in
reducing the risk of vertebral, non-vertebral, hip and wrist fractures and,
in increasing femoral neck BMD. Zoledronate could be considered a first-
line option for people at increased risk of fractures.
P508
HIGHER URATE LEVELS ASSOCIATED WITH GREATER
BONE MINERAL DENSITY IN OLDER ADULTS
F. Brennan1, N. Maher1, C. O'Carroll1, G. Steen1, R. Lannon1, K.
McCarroll1
1St James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Objective: Higher serum urate levels are associated with greater BMD
and lower prevalence of fractures in several large studies. While first
reported in 2011, the mechanism remains unclear, and some studies are
conflicting. Urate is an antioxidant and may influence bone health via
effects on osteoblast function. This study aimed to explore the relation-
ship between serum urate and BMD in older Irish adults.
Methods: We identified patients aged >60 y at our bone health clinic who
had serum urate measured and BMD assessed using DXA. Patients who
were on teriparatide treatment were excluded as it is known to increase
serum urate. The relationship between urate and BMD at the hip and
spine was explored in multinomial regression models.
S270
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: Study included 1538 with a mean age of 74.5±8.3 y, of whom
83.6% were female. 67.1% had osteoporosis and 28.1% had osteopenia.
Higher urate levels were associated with greater BMD in the spine
(P=0.0001) after adjustment for age, gender, BMI, eGFR and serum
25(OH)D. In a smaller subset (n=1046) serum urate also independently
predicted greater BMD at the total hip (P=0.02).
Conclusion: Higher serum urate was associated with greater BMD at the
hip and spine in keeping with other studies. We were not able to account
for thiazide diuretics which increase serum urate, reduce urinary calcium
excretion and are positively associated with BMD. More research is
needed to better understand the potential mechanisms underlying this
relationship.
P509
THE UTILITY OF ULTRASOUND OF THE HEEL IN
DIAGNOSING OSTEOPOROSIS: EXPERIENCE FROM A
BONE HEALTH CLINIC
F. Brennan1, N. Maher1, C. O'Carroll1, G. Steen1, R. Lannon1, K.
McCarroll1
1St James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Objective: Heel ultrasound can be used as an alternative to DXA scan-
ning in assessing BMD. While not validated as a diagnostic tool, popu-
lation studies show a high negative predictive value for osteoporosis. This
study aimed to investigate its utility in patients attending a specialist bone
health clinic.
Methods: Heel ultrasound results were compared to DXA diagnoses at our
clinic and concordance rates, negative predictive value (NPV) and positive
predictive value (PPV) were calculated. We also identified the correlation
between BMD and bone ultrasound attenuation (BUA) and speed of sound
(SOS) and the predictive value of heel ultrasound for hip fractures.
Results: 3753 patients were identified with a mean age of 67.2±8.8 y, of
whom 76.5% were female. Concordance rate for osteoporosis were
87.8% (1117/1271) and osteopenia 27.4% (362/1324). Ultrasound T-
scores were worse than DXA in 5% of cases. For diagnosing osteoporo-
sis, PPV was 87.8% using (ultrasound T-score < -2.5.) and NPV was
63.3% (using ultrasound T-score > -2.5). In sub-analysis (n=2822) there
was only a modest correlation between total hip BMD and SOS (r2=0.24,
P<0.001) and BUA (r2=0.19, P<0.001). An ultrasound T-score < -2.5 vs.
normal predicted a history of hip fracture (OR 2.39, CI. 2.00 - 2.87,
P<0.0001)
Conclusion: Ultrasound of the heel had a good positive predictive value
for diagnosing osteoporosis. However, it was less effective at ruling out
osteoporosis, missing about a third of cases. As a specialist centre how-
ever, many of our patients were not treatment naive and had secondary
causes for their bone loss. The results suggest that ultrasound of the heel is
of less value at a specialist bone health clinic.
P510
PERIPHERAL QUANTITATIVE COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
DERIVED BONE PARAMETERS IN MEN WITH IMPAIRED
FASTING GLUCOSE AND TYPE 2 DIABETES
K. L. Holloway-Kew1, K. B. Anderson1, M. C. Tembo1, S. X. Sui1, J.
Harland1, N. K. Hyde1, M. A. Kotowicz1, J. A. Pasco1
1Deakin University, IMPACT, Geelong, Australia
Objective: Individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) are at
higher risk of fracture, but paradoxically do not have reduced BMD as
measured by DXA. This study investigated associations between pQCT-
derived bone parameters and glycaemia status.
Methods: Participants were men (n=414, age 33-96 y) from the Geelong
Osteoporosis Study. Diabetes was defined by fasting plasma glucose
(FPG) ≥7.0 mmol/L, self-report of diabetes or antihyperglycaemic
medication use. Two men with type 1 diabetes were excluded. Impaired
fasting glucose (IFG) was classified as FPG 5.6-6.9 mmol/L. Bone mea-
sures were derived using pQCT (XCT 2000 Stratec Medizintechnik,
Germany) at the radius (4% site: n=376, 66% site: n=348) and tibia
(4%, n=366, 66%: n=355). Linear regression was used to investigate
associations between glycaemia status and pQCT-derived bone parame-
ters, adjusting for potential confounders.
Results: There were 301 (72.7%) men with normoglycaemia, 62 (15.0%)
with IFG and 51 (12.3%) with T2DM. At the 4% site, men with T2DM
had lower age-, weight- and height-adjusted bone total area at the radius (-
6.5%) and tibia (-4.3%) compared to the normoglycaemia group.
Trabecular and cortical area were also lower at the radius (-6.5%) and
tibia (-4.4%). Cortical density was higher for men with T2DM at the
radius (+5.9%) and tibia (+4.8%). Adjusted total bone density at the radial
site was also higher (+4.9%). At the 66% site, adjusted polar stress strain
index was lower for men with T2DM at the radius (-8.1%) and tibia (-
5.6%). No differences were detected for IFG. Femoral neck BMD was not
different between the three groups (normoglycaemia: 0.954±0.136, IFG:
0.982±0.121, T2DM: 0.964±0.116 g/cm2, p=0.320).
Conclusion: Men with T2DM had lower polar stress strain index and
total bone, trabecular and cortical areas than the other two groups; how-
ever, cortical density was higher. No differences were detected between
the groups for femoral neck BMD.
P511
BATCHBMD: AN ACCURATE AND EFFICIENT DUAL-
ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY REPORT GENERATOR
W.-C. Huang1, W. P. Chan2
1Dept. of Computer Science & Information Engineering, National
Taiwan University, 2Dept. of Radiology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei
Medical University, Dept. of Radiology, School of Medicine, College
of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Objective: In recent years, studies have shown that structural reporting
systems can increase the efficiency and accuracy of reporting. However,
there is still room for further improvements especially with respect to
workflow, software functionality, and reporting performance. This study
evaluates the use of the standalone software BatchBMD, which is used to
generate a self-defined DXA report from a structured report (SR).
Methods: The BatchBMD software extracts data from DXA and body
composition SRs stored in the Picture Archiving and Communication
System (PACS) per the ISCD guidelines as stated in the 2019 Official
Positions for adults. The software allows users to export searched DXA
reports with a single click. To determine the efficiency and accuracy of
the BatchBMD software, 500 random DXA SRs from January 2020 to
March 2021 were selected. Subsequently, these cases were used to com-
pare the BatchBMD software with the former web-based reporting sys-
tem which was used at Taipei Municipal Wanfang Hospital. The
reporting time was defined as the time from when a radiological technol-
ogist completed an exam and submitted the SR to PACS to when the
reporting radiologist reviewed and approved the generated report and
submitted it to the Radiology Information System (RIS) or Hospital
Information System (HIS).
Results: 500 randomly selected DXA SRs were generated using GE
Encore software and reviewed by referring physicians. Average reporting
time was 10.8 min using the former reporting system, though only
6.7 min using the BatchBMD software. The reporting error rate was
1.8% using the former reporting system, though only 0.6% using the
BatchBMD software. The most common error committed by the former
reporting system was related to the inaccurate identification of the posi-
tion of a compression fracture, while the most common error committed
by the BatchBMD software was generating an inaccurate second digit
after the decimal point when computing the patient’s age or appendicular
skeletal muscle index.
S271
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: BatchBMD software improves both the accuracy and effi-
ciency of structured DXA reporting.
P512
DOES LOW LEVELS OF VITAMIN D INCREASE SEVERITY IN
COVID-19 PATIENTS? ARGENTINE EXPERIENCE
M. L. García1, E. Giacoia2, A. P. Lisdero1, M. González Pernas1, M. G.
Crueño2, F. N. Lopez2, M. Scarabino1, E. F. Areniello1, S. Bacigaluppi1,
B. Freile2, E. Moratto2, V. Pollini3, J. Netel3, M. Espósito4, D. A. Halac4,
G. A. Mumbach1
1Sanatorio Méndez, 2Hospital Posadas, 3Hospital Morón, 4Sanatorio
Anchorena, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Objective: Vitamin D (VD) plays a role in immune response. Recent data
shows that low levels of VD could worsen COVID-19 outcomes. This
study aimed to establish an association between VD levels among
COVID-19 patients with clinical outcomes and inflammatory markers.
Methods: Prospective multicentric cohort study. Consecutively recruit-
ment. Patients were grouped according admission status and level of VD
[sufficient >30 ng/ml (VDS), insufficient 20-30 ng/ml (VDI), deficient
<20 ng/ml (VDD)]. The variables evaluated were age, gender, oxygen
mask requirement (O2r), mechanical ventilation (MV), pre-existing co-
morbidities, inflammatory markers, severity of COVID-19 measured by
News Score.
Results: 363 patients were recruited (age 53±16), 59% male, 88% from
total were hospitalized, whose VD levels were significantly lower than
ambulatories (19±11 vs. 24.3±14 ng/ml p:0.006). The amount between
groups was VDS (15%), VDI (27%), VDD (58%).VD levels correlated
negatively with hospitalization days and evolution time (p:0.045-
p:0.043). Severity of COVID-19 adjusted by comorbidities was linked
to a lower VD status (p:<0.001) Also an association with pronation re-
quirement among patients with lower VD levels (p: 0.008) was observed.
O2r risk was elevated among VDI (OR 2.9 95%CI 1.3-7) and VDD (OR
3 95%CI 1.4-6), multiplying the odds in 2.6 and 3.7 in presence of 1 or
more comorbidities with a higher need of ICU in VDD groups (OR 4.8
95%CI 1.2-20). A negative relation between VD levels, basal ferritin and
LDH was described (p:0.018 and p:0.045).
Conclusion: Among COVID-19 hospitalized VD level was significantly
lower than ambulatory patients. There is an association between low VD
with a worse course of disease needing more days of hospitalization, thus
lengthening the time of sickness. VDI and VDD group had severe forms
of COVID-19. VDD presented a higher risk for ICU attention. Further
studies are needed to emphasize the importance of adequate levels of VD
to improve COVID-19 outcomes.
P513
LOWER CALCIUM LEVELS AND CORRELATION WITH
WORSE COURSE OF COVID-19
G. A. Mumbach1, E. Giacoia2, A. P. Lisdero1, M. González Pernas1, M.
G. Crueño2, E. Moratto2, M. Scarabino1, E. F. Areniello1, S.
Bacigaluppi1, M. Espósito3, B. Freile2, F. N. Lopez2, V. Pollini4, M. L.
García1
1Sanatorio Méndez, 2Hospital Posadas, 3Sanatorio Anchorena, 4Hospital
Morón, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Objective: An osteometabolic phenotype is suspected in COVID-19 pa-
tients. Calcium levels (ca) could have repercussions on clinical course and
therefore investigational lines should be open. This study aimed to deter-
mine if ca could influence clinical outcomes or inflammatory markers in
SARS-CoV-2 patients.
Methods: Prospective multicentric cohort study. Consecutively recruit-
ment. The variables evaluated were age, gender, oxygen mask require-
ment (O2r), mechanical ventilation (MV), pre-existing comorbidities,
inflammatory markers, severity of COVID-19 measured by News
Score. Patients were grouped according Vitamin D (VD) level [sufficient
>30 ng/ml (VDS), insufficient 20-30 ng/ml (VDI), deficient <20 ng/ml
(VDD)]. Hypocalcemia is considered when ca was lower of 8.4 mg/dl.
Results: 363 patients were recruited, aged 53±16, 59% male. 88% of
patients were hospitalized, no differences in ca against ambulatory pa-
tients were found. 20% of patients presented hypocalcemia. Significant
differences in ca between VDS, VDI and VDD was seen (9.13±0.4-8.9
±0.42-8.7±0.7 p:<0.001) observing an increase of 0.014 mg/dl of ca for
each point of ng/ml of VD ca correlated with severity of the disease,
noticing a drop of 0.17 mg/dl in severe cases by News score, lower ca
adjusted by comorbidities had an OR 1.74 95%CI 1.08-2.85 for severity.
It was also associated with O2r p:0.041, prone position p:0.029, ICU
attention p:0.005, MV p:0.002, days of MV p:0.007 and mortality
p:0.001, having an OR for this last of 7.9 95%CI 2.6-24. A cut off value
≤8.3 mg/dl of ca was related with a HR:5 95%CI 1.4-17 p:0.013 for
mortality.
Conclusion: Low ca is frequently seen in COVID-19 patients and could
be associated with worse outcomes as O2r, MV, ICU attention and mor-
tality, perhaps because of repercussions on neurological and vascular
functions. Calcemia ≤8.3 mg/dl was significantly correlated with an in-
crease in mortality. However further studies are need it to assess its real
repercussion and treatment impact.
P514
ACTIVITIES OF TURKISH OSTEOPOROSIS SOCIETY
Y. Kutsal1, U. Akarirmak2, A. Küçükdeveci̇3, J. Meray4, Y. Kirazli5, M.
Saridogan2, O. Özdemir1, Z. Günendi4
1Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, 2İstanbul University -
Cerrahpaşa, Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, 3Ankara University,
İbni Sina Medical Faculty, Ankara, 4Gazi University Medical Faculty,
Ankara, 5Ege University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey
The Society performed various activities to increase the awareness for the
prevention of osteoporotic fractures and loss of independence.
The Turkish Osteoporosis Society is a national, neutral, nonprofit orga-
nization which aims to increase the standards in the field of “osteoporosis,
osteoarthritis and musculoskeletal problems” including education of
health professionals, patient care and treatment.
The society was founded in 1998 by the medical school faculty members
who had been working in the field of osteoporosis aiming to create or
make contributions for the development of technical, scientific and social
facilities and it also cooperates with international and national institutions,
organizations, foundations and societies for this purpose. The Turkish
Osteoporosis Society is a member of International Osteoporosis
Foundation (IOF). Education- In order to prevent osteoporotic fractures,
one of the priorities of the society is education for the physicians and the
other health professionals. Since its foundation the society performed
various activities regarding the osteoporosis prevention, early diagnosis
and effective treatment approaches not only for the health professionals
but for the public as well. Pharmacologic treatment and nonpharmacolo-
gic approaches, also the chronic consequences and rehabilitation are con-
sidered as the important themes in these training programmes.
Congresses, symposiums and courses are organized regularly. Also var-
ious conferences and panels are organized by the society in different cities
of the country with the local tutors. Recently OSTEOACADEMY-
Istanbul was organized online on October 10-11, 2020 and
OSTEO2021 “Osteoporosis, Osteoarthritis and Musculoskeletal Pain
Congress” will be held on digital platform on October 8-10, 2021.
Other important events that should be mentioned are, Turkish
Osteoporosis Society organized several Clinical Densitometry
Certificate Courses, which were endorsed by IOF.
Publications: The Turkish Journal of Osteoporosis is the society's scien-
tific publication, which has been published regularly since 1998 and is
included in the Emerging Science Citation Index-ESCI. By the Scientific
Council of the Turkish Osteoporosis Society several books were pub-
lished for the physicians. Also various booklets were distributed free of
charge for the public. Recently 3 newspapers (osteogazette) were
S272
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
prepared, published and distributed in the digital platform. A consensus
report entitled; “Updated approach for the management of osteoporosis in
Turkey” was published in 2020. A panel of multidisciplinary experts
developed a thorough review to assist clinicians in identifying osteopo-
rosis and associated fracture risk patients, diagnosing the disease with the
appropriate available diagnostic methods, classifying the disease, and
initiating appropriate treatment. The panel expects to increase the aware-
ness of this prevalent disease, decrease consequences of osteoporosis with
corresponding cost savings and, ultimately, decrease the overall burden of
osteoporosis and related fractures in Turkey. The Turkish Osteoporosis
Society’s epidemiologic, scientific publication on the prevalence of hip
fracture in Turkey has led to the national data in country based FRAX and
is used in our country for risk assessment.
Public Education Activities: Translations of IOF publications continue to
be made and shared on the society's web page. Very recently a document
entitled “Osteoporosis in the Covid 19 pandemic” was prepared by the
board of Directors of the society.
Virtual Osteoporosis Congress for the Public: A two days Osteoporosis
Congress was held free of charge for the public education in April 1-2,
2021 also. Important aspects of osteoporosis prevention, early diagnosis,
lifestyle modification and awareness on risk factors were discussed in
detail.
World Osteoporosis Day: Public conferences and BMD measurements
for screening (calcaneal US) are performed free of charge every year on
the World Osteoporosis Day in various cities of the country. Also press
conferences and press releases are prepared. In 2020 a declaration was
made by the board of directors of Turkish Osteoporosis Society focusing
on: “Osteoporosis is a disease that should not be overshadowed during the
COVID-19 pandemic”.
Social Responsibility Projects: Turkish Osteoporosis Society planted
1000 pine saplings in 1998 as a social responsibility project. 20 years
later the planted saplings became a magnificent pine grove. In order to
attract interest and raise awareness, in 2020 "Break records, not bones "
campaign was organized. The Society took place in the Guinness Book of
World Records for the highest number of BMD screening in 24 h.
The most important project aiming at prevention of the disease and solu-
tion of fractures is the latest one entitled; “Keep on living with healthy
bones”. In this context all the members of the executive board of the
society prepared videos about the risk factors, signs and symptoms, diag-
nosis, prevention, treatment of osteoporosis. Also nutrition, physical ac-
tivity and the impact on quality of life are presented in those videos in the
web site of the society. The activities are announced and shared not only
by the web site, but Facebook and Instagram pages as well.
FLS: Fracture liaison service is another solution for post fracture care. In
coordination of the IOF, training of the Turkish FLS team has been started
with the representatives of our society. This programme is considered as
an important goal is to increase the number of FLS centers throughout
Turkey.
Since 1998, a considerable number of people have been reached through
various activities carried out by the Society on different platforms and
have contributed to the protection of this public health issue by raising
awareness of disease prevention and early diagnosis.
P515
KINETOTHERAPY IN KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS IN TIMES
OF PANDEMIC IN REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
A. Vîzdoagă1, V. Salaru2, L. Mazur-Nicorici2, N. Loghin-Oprea2, M.
Garabajiu2, M. Cebanu2, S. Vetrilă2, V. Sadovici-Bobeică2, T. Rotaru3,
M. Mazur2
1University Rehabilitation Center, 2Nicolae Testemitanu State University
of Medicine & Pharmacy of the Republic of Moldova, 3Institute of
Cardiology, Chisinau, Moldova
Objective: Kinetotherapy is proposed as a method of
nonpharmacological treatment of knee osteoarthritis (OA) by the
EULAR and OARSI recommendations. Since the COVID-19 pandemic
was declared by the WHO in March 2020, there have been different
restrictions for outpatient rehabilitation clinics in the Republic of
Moldova, from banning clinic visits, limited access, or the need for addi-
tional precautions for both patient safety and health professionals. This
study aimed to assess the restrictions of the kinetotherapy rehabilitation
program in patients with osteoarthritis during the pandemic.
Methods: We performed a qualitative study of patient attitude and the
impact of COVID-19 restrictions on their rehabilitation program. The
sample (n=28) consisted of patients with osteoarthritis that were admitted
to outpatient rehabilitation facilities associated with University
Rehabilitation Center. All patients underwent a standard kinetotherapy
10 d program between September 2020-March 2021. The patient’s opin-
ions were assessed in semi-structed interview by phone calls, after com-
pleting the kinetotherapy program. The qualitative findings of the impact
of pandemic restrictions on patients with OA.
Results: In the study were included 28 patients (9 men and 19 women).
The analysis revealed 9 areas concerning challenging reasons in patients
with knee OA during the rehabilitation program: certain restrictions
across the country determined by infection rate, fear for traveling in pub-
lic transport or becoming infected during exercise program because they
cannot keep a safe distance, high rate of abandon or poor adherence to
kinetotherapeutic program due to patient infection or need to respect the
self-isolation, preference of individual sessions rather than group ses-
sions, increased rate of telerehabilitation, challenges in elderly to use
gadgets, post-COVID symptoms caused some limitation for the intensity
of the program, increased communication needs of patients.
Conclusion: Kinetotherapy rehabilitation is an important part of the man-
agement of knee osteoarthritis, its realization in pandemic conditions de-
termined several challenges, as brought challenges but also opportunities.
P516
F R E Q U E N C Y O F H Y P O V I T A M I N O S I S D A N D
ASSOCIATIONS OF 25 (OH)D PLASMA CONCENTRATION
WITH INDICATORS OF DISEASE ACTIVITY IN PATIENTS
WITH RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
A. V. Rudenka1, A. E. Buglova1, T. D. Tyabut1
1Belarusian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Minsk,
Belarus
Objective: Vitamin D deficiency is an important environmental risk fac-
tor that influences the prevalence and severity of several autoimmune
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of this study was
to determine the frequency of vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency in
patients with RA and to establish associations of plasma concentration of
25(OH)D with indicators of disease activity.
Methods: 156 patients with RA were enrolled in the study: 139 women
(mean age 60.1±13.7 y) and 17 men (mean age 58.8±13.4 y). Clinical
status, level of rheumatoid factor, C-reactive protein, total vitamin D
(25(OH)D), antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptide (ACCP) were deter-
mined. RA activity was assessed using indices DAS28 (Disease Activity
Score), SDAI (Simplified Disease Activity Index) and CDAI (Clinical
Disease Activity Index).
Results: Average levels of 25(OH)D in the surveyed sample were 25.2
±13.2 ng/ml. Normal 25(OH)D, its insufficiency and deficiency were
observed in 47 (30.3%), 45 (28.7%) and 64 (40.7%) patients, respective-
ly. The average level of 25(OH)D in patients taking vitamin D prepara-
tions was 29.1±10.7 ng/ml, in those who did not take it - 21.4±12.5 ng/ml
(p=0.002). Patients with vitamin D deficiency had statistically significant
higher levels of DAS28 (4.5±0.2), CDAI (48.7±6.6), SDAI (22.4±2.1)
and tender joints count (13.6±1.5) in comparison with those who had
vitamin D insufficiency (3.5±0.4; 14.3±1.9; 27.3±4.6; 8.1±1.3) and nor-
mal 25(OH)D (3.3±0.4; 15.1±2.1; 31.0±5.6; 9.5±1.6) respectively.
Conclusion: The results of the study indicate a high prevalence of
hypovitaminosis D in patients with RA. One of the main causes of
S273
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
hypovitaminosis D deficiency in patients with RA is the low level of
vitamin D supplementation - 39.1%. Vitamin D deficiency in RA pa-
tients are associated with higher scores of disease activity and num-
ber of tender joints. It is advisable to prescribe vitamin D as an
adjunctive therapy in patients with active RA with a potential im-
munomodulatory purpose, as well as for the prevention and treat-
ment of disorders of bone metabolism.
P517
E F F E C T O F A M U L T I C O M P O N E N T M E D I C A L
REHABILITATION PROGRAM ON PAIN AND FATIGUE IN
PATIENTS WITH OSTEOARTHRITIS AND RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS
N. V. Aleksandrova1, A. V. Aleksandrov1, V. A. Aleksandrov2, M. V.
Nikitin3, R. A. Grekhov1
1Research Institute of Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology A.B.
Zborovsky, Volgograd, 2Volgograd State Medical University, Dept. of
Hospital Therapy, Volgograd, 3Sanatorium-Resort Complex "Vulan" -
Scientific and Clinical Branch of the FSB Institution "National Medical
Research Center for Rehabilitation and Balneology", Gelendzhik, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the short-term effectiveness of a multicomponent
rehabilitation program based on aerobic exercises in patients with osteo-
arthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Methods: We observed 60 patients with OA (mean age 57.4 [49.3:71.1]
y, duration of disease 14.8 [5.5:21.9] y) and 74 patients with RA (mean
age 52.1±9.6 y, duration of disease 9.2 [4.8;13.6] y). The following re-
habilitation technologies (RT) were used at the sanatorium-resort stage of
medical rehabilitation (within 21 d): I - kinesitherapy (dosed walking
from 30-60 min daily), II - hydrokinesitherapy (therapeutic swimming
in a pool with seawater, 10 -12 procedures for 30 min daily or every other
day), III - low-frequency magnetotherapy (LFM) (from 0.3-100 Hz; up to
5 mT; 10 procedures for 30 min every other day), IV - a method of
functional biocontrol with biofeedback (BFB therapy) (10-12 sessions
of thermal and myographic BFB therapy, for 20-25 min daily). The in-
tensity of pain in the affected joints (while walking) was assessed using
the visual analogue pain scale (VAS Huskisson). The VAS0-100 and
Bristol Rheumatoid Arthritis Fatigue Numerical Rating Scales (BRAF-
NRS V2) were used to assess fatigue.
Results: The combined use of RT-I and RT-II in OA patients (n=24)
resulted in a decrease in pain intensity (p=0.041) and fatigue on the
VAS0-100 scale (p=0.044), and in RA patients (n=28) resulted in decreased
pain on the VAS scale (p=0.031), decreased fatigue on the VAS0-100
(p=0.04), NRS severity and NRS-overcoming scales (p=0.008 and
p=0.013, respectively). The combined use of RT-III and RT-IV in OA
patients (n=20) reduced pain (p=0.017) and the number of swollen joints
(p=0.044), and in RA patients (n=22) reduced NRS-overcoming
(p=0.027). The use of a multicomponent treatment regimen (combination
of all RTs) in the group of OA patients (n=16) showed a significant
decrease in pain intensity (p=0.022), VAS0-100 fatigue (p=0.021), number
of painful joints (p=0, 034), and in the group of patients with RA (n=24)
resulted in a decrease in pain intensity on the VAS scale (p=0.018), num-
ber of painful joints (p=0.023), level of chronic fatigue on VAS0-100
(p=0.002) and all components of BRAF-NRS (NRS-degree of severity,
p=0.009 NRS-overcoming, p<0.001; NRS-effect, p=0.033).
Conclusion: Dynamics of joint syndrome indexes, pain and chronic fa-
tigue demonstrate the positive result of multicomponent treatment
scheme on the basis of combination of aerobic exercises and methods
of modern physiotherapy in patients with RA. It is possible to achieve
significant changes in the studied parameters in patients with OA even
with the isolated use of aerobic exercises (walking, swimming).
P518
GENETIC VARIATION IN VITAMIN D METABOLISM IN THE
MOTHER, RATHER THAN THE FETUS, IS ASSOCIATED
WITH UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD 25-HYDROXYVITAMIN D
STATUS: FINDINGS FROM THE MAVIDOS RANDOMIZED
CONTROLLED TRIAL
R. J. Moon1, S. D'Angelo1, E. M. Curtis1, L. Cooke2, S. R. Crozier1, K.
M. Godfrey1, N. J. Graham2, J. W. Holloway2, R. Lewis2, J. Cleal2, J. H.
Davies3, H. M. Inskip1, C. Cooper1, N. C. Harvey1
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton,
2Human Health & Development, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, 3Paediatric Endocrinology, University Hospital
Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK
Objective: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the vitamin D
metabolism pathway are associated with serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
[25(OH)D] in adulthood. The fetus is dependent on transfer of
25(OH)D across the placenta. We assessed whether maternal and/or off-
spring SNPs in this pathway are associated with umbilical cord blood
(UCB) 25(OH)D, and if antenatal vitamin D supplementation modifies
the relationships.
Methods: MAVIDOS is a randomised placebo controlled trial of 1000
IU/d cholecalciferol from 14 weeks gestation until delivery. UCB
25(OH)D was assessed by tandem mass spectrometry. SNPs at
rs12785878 (7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, DHCR7), rs10741657
(25-hydroxylase, CYP2R1), rs6013897 (24-hydroxylase, CYP24A1) and
rs2282679 (vitamin D binding protein [DBP], GC) were genotyped in
maternal and UCB blood. Associations between deseasonalised
25(OH)D generated by Fourier analysis and the SNPs were assessed by
linear regression for each study group using an additive model (β=change
in 25(OH)D per additional common allele). Models were adjusted for
maternal age, triceps skinfold thickness and late pregnancy smoking as
these were associated with UCB 25(OH)D.
Results: 329 mother-offspring pairs were included (165 cholecalciferol,
185 placebo). The cholecalciferol group had higher UCB 25(OH)D
(mean 42.3 nmol/l; SD 13.1) than the placebo group (mean 28.6 nmol/l;
SD 12.1), p<0.001. The SNP at rs22825679 (GC) in the mother was
associated with UCB 25(OH)D in the cholecalciferol group (β=4.2
nmol/l per allele; 95%CI 1.0, 7.3). The effect of this SNP in the placebo
group was smaller (β=1.9 nmol/l per allele; 95%CI -0.6, 4.4). The other
maternal SNPs and all offspring SNPs were not associated with UCB
25(OH)D in either group.
Conclusion: Maternal rather than fetal genetic variation in GC,
encoding DBP, is associated with fetal 25(OH)D. The effect of the
SNP was larger in pregnancies supplemented with cholecalciferol,
suggesting a possible effect of the SNP on DBP binding affinity or
concentration, which becomes more important in a vitamin D re-
plete state. Future work needs to establish the effect of this SNP
on DBP levels in pregnancy, and the role of maternal DBP in trans-
port of 25(OH)D to and across the placenta.
P519
NECK PAIN AMONG HEALTH WORKERS IN PRIMARY
HEALTH CARE
M. Kovačević1, R. Krasnik2, D. Vukliš1, J. Zvekić-Svorcan3, A. Mikov2,
J. Lačokova Krasnikova4
1University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Medicine, Novi Sad, 2University of
Novi Sad, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Child and Youth Health Care
of Vojvodina, Novi Sad, 3University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Medicine,
Special Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Novi Sad, 4Health Center Bač,
Bač, Serbia
S274
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Neck pain (NP) has shown as prevalent and non-ignorable
health problem among health professionals. The aim of this study was to
examine the presence of NP, as well as the some factors associated with
the NP among health workers in primary health care.
Methods: A prospective cross-sectional study was conducted in the pe-
riod from April 1 to May 1, 2021 and included 31 respondents of both
genders employed at the Health Center Bač, Serbia. Data were collected
on current neck pain and its duration, years of work experience, profes-
sional qualification and daily time spent on computer and mobile phone.
Degree of disability due to neck pain was assessed with neck disability
index (NDI). EZR statistical software was used for statistical analysis.
Results: In the examined sample (n=31; female 83.9%), the average age
of the respondents was 45±13.6 y, and the average work experience was
19.4±13.9 y. Most of the respondents had a high school degree (19
(61.3%)). Average daily time spent on computer and mobile phone was
6±2.8 h and 2.8±2.8 h, respectively. Current NP was reported by 12
(38.7%) subjects, and in most of them (9 (50%)) the duration of pain
was up to 6 weeks. The average NDI score was 8.6±6.9, which indicates
mild disability due to the NP. Statistically significant positive correlation
was found between years of work experience and NDI score (r=0.401,
p=0.025), but not between NDI score and age and daily time spent on
computer/mobile phone.
Conclusion: Our study has shown the presence of NP in a significant
number of respondents working in primary health care and that years of
work experience positively correlate with disability due to NP measured
with NDI. It is necessary to identify and further analyze risk factors for
NP in health workers, as well as to take prevention strategies.
P520
WHY NOT MORE CONFIDENCE IN THE BONEMARKERS
PUBLISHED IN THE GERMAN DVO GUIDELINES 2017?
C. Günther1, T. Blattert1, K. U. Hafer1, O. Nikiforov1, K. Ortlepp1
1Orthopädische Fachklinik, Schwarzach, Germany
Objective: In an earlier release (Osteoporose & Rheuma aktuell 1/03, 12-
13) we could show, that in bisphosphonates therapy – in contrast to
international literature with a 3-6 months examination interval after
starting the treatment - short time monitoring of the bone marker is pos-
sible already after two weeks. In the updated DVO guidelines (valid since
28 Jan 2018) the bone markers are only given the status of a “single case
decision”. Following our own clinical experiences, the bone markers are
underestimated and used too seldom in spite of right and/or wrong appli-
cation. This article is willing to induce a “PRO”.
Methods: Included were 31 patients (26 female, 5 male, all age of 67 y)
with an LWS T-score < -2.5 and the related risk factors following the
DVO guidelines. The patients were treated, as a basic therapy, with
800 mg calcium/d and 1000-1200 mg vitamin D /d and a weekly dose
of 35 mg risedronate. As a bone marker the β-CrossLaps with the Elecsys
β-CrossLaps Test (Roche Diagnostics GmbH) were taken before the
beginning of the therapy in the morning between 8 and 9 and again 14
d after the start. It is important that the time of the taking of the blood
sample must not differ more than 15 min ± in comparison to the first
blood sample. The results have been intensely discussed with the patient,
the drop of CrossLaps was visualized and the effect of the treatment was
demonstrated obviously and profoundly. One year after the start of the
treatment, the patients were contacted on the phone and questioned about
their compliance.
Results: Compliance data could be collected from 83.9% (i.e., 26 out of
31). Five patients reported that their family doctor stopped the treatment.
But after twelve months 21 out of the remaining 26 (80.8%) continued
with bisphosphonate therapy.
Conclusion: In spite of extremely low persistence rates in the Grand I-
Study (Hadji et al. Osteoporos Int 2012;23:223) – 9,6% with daily, 28.4%
with weekly und 29.4% with monthly oral intake of bisphosphonates –
our persistence rate is remarkably higher with 80.8%. This shows that the
application of bone markers in short time monitoring after 2 weeks –
along with the right application and plausible explanation of the optimis-
tic results to the patient – is a simple but effective instrument in the
leading of patients on the way to an improved compliance. Therefore
we encourage all our osteological colleagues to make more generous
use of the bone markers than advised in the guidelines 2017, but always
with strict control of blood samples (taken at the same time) before and
after the start of the treatment. This could under special circumstances be
cofinanced by the patient who will be thankful for a positive development
of his wellbeing. Always remember: only the osteoporosis medication –
and we have a lot of great medicines – that is really taken by the patient
can make the best effect.
P521
SERUM MICRORNAS IN OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURE AND
OSTEOARTHRITIS: A GENETIC AND FUNCTIONAL STUDY
C. Pertusa1, J. J. Tarín2, A. Cano3, M. A. García Pérez4, D. Mifsut5
1INCLIVA Health Research Institute, Valencia, 2Dept. of Cellular
Biology, Functional Biology and Physical Anthropology, University of
Valencia, Burjassot, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, Obstetrics & Gynecology,
University of Valencia, Valencia, 4Dept. of Genetics, University of
Valencia, Burjassot, 5Orthopedic Surgery and Traumatology, Clinic
Hospital, INCLIVA Institute of Health Research, Valencia, Spain
Objective: The rising incidence of bone pathologies such as osteoporosis
and osteoarthritis is negatively affecting the functional status of millions
of patients worldwide. The genetic component of these multifactorial
pathologies is far from being fully understood, but in recent years several
epigenetic mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of these bone
diseases have been identified. The aim of the present study was to com-
pare the serum expression of four miRNAs in women with hip fragility
fracture (OF group), osteoarthritis requiring hip replacement (OA group)
and control women (Ctrl group).
Methods: Serum expression of miR-497-5p, miR-155-5p, miR-423-5p
and miR-365-3p was determined in a sample of 23 OA women, 25 OF
women and 52 Ctrl women.
Results: Data shown that women with bone pathologies have higher
expression of miR-497 and miR-423 and lower expression of miR-155
and miR-365 than control subjects. Most importantly, miR-497 was iden-
tified as an excellent discriminator between OA group and control group
(AUC: 0.89, p<0.000) and acceptable in distinguishing from the OF
group (AUC: 0.76, p=0.002).
Conclusion: Our data suggest that circulating miR-497 may represent a
significant biomarker of OA, a promising finding that could contribute
towards future early-stage diagnosis of this disease. Further studies are
required to establish the role of miR-155, miR-423 and miR-365 in bone
pathologies.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by grant PI17/01875 from
the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (Madrid, Spain), including funds from the
EU FEDER Program.
P522
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON OSTEOARTHRITS OF KNEE
A. Kaur1, M. Mitra1, D. Wadhwa1
1MVP's College of Physiotherapy, Nashik, India
Objective: COVID-19 is a pandemic disease which affected huge num-
ber of people all over the world. Many post COVID patients experienced
exacerbated musculoskeletal symptoms especially those who had preex-
isting problems. Osteoarthritis [OA] of knee is a common problem that
exists among the elderly because of which there is a functional limitation.
COVID-19 adds on to the disability and impairment. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate pain, functional impairment, and daily activity in
post COVID-19 patients with knee OA. To check if there was any
S275
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
co-relation between COVID-19 functional status and knee function in
patients with OA
Methods: The study included 36 patients who got infected with COVID-
19 and with knee OA. They were classified based on Kellgren-Lawrence
criteria and graded accordingly. Data was collected from patient telephon-
ically during the first week of isolation and also on the 4th week when they
visited the specialised post COVID rehabilitation opd. Patients rated their
pain level on the basis of a visual analog scale (VAS) and completed
WOMAC and the post COVID-19 functional status scales. Statistical tool:
The collected data was compared for the first and the fourth week for
significance. Karl Pearsons test for correlation was used to find the corre-
lation between WOMAC and post COVID-19 functional status index.
Results: VAS and WOMAC scores increased significantly after COVID-
19 infection. A positive co-relation existed between WOMAC and post
COVID-19 functional status index.
Conclusion: COVID-19 has had a significant impact on pain, joint func-
tion and physical function in patients who already had OA of knee.
P523
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES IN PATIENTS WITH
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS IN LONG-TERM PROSPECTIVE
OBSERVATIONAL STUDY
P. Kozhevnikova1, I. Dydykina1, P. Kovalenko1, M. Blank1, A. Lila1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective:Todeterminethefrequencyandlocalizationofosteoporoticfrac-
turesinrheumatoidarthritis(RA)patientswithRAoccurredduringthelong-
term prospective observational study.
Methods: The study included 80 woman with RA, aged 40-80 y. Mean
duration of observation 8.23±1.3 y; mean age 62.5±8.7 y; the mean RA
duration 23.2±10.1 y; 74 (92.5%) were in menopause, mean age at men-
opause 47.9±4.8 y. All patients took a clinical examination, assessment of
the anamnestic data, X-ray of hands, feet, thoracic and lumbar spine and
DXA of lumbar spine and femoral neck.
Results: During the follow-up period, the number of patients with frac-
tures was increased from 22 (27.5%) to 36 (45%). There were occurred 25
new cases of osteoporotic fractures: 6 patients with re-fractures and 14
patients with a fracture for the first time. We divided patients into two
groups: group I - 20 patients with fractures, group II - 60 patients without
fractures, occurred during the follow-up period. The mean age, disease
duration, activity of RA and the number of patients with history of prior
fracture was not significantly different in groups. The number of patients
with BMD corresponding to OP at baseline was not significantly different
between groups: 12 (60%) vs. 23 (38%) (p=0.08), while in dynamics
there was a significant difference: 16 (80%) vs. 30 (50%) (p=0.01), re-
spectively. During the follow-up period glucocorticoid therapy (GC) had
16 (80%) patients in group I vs. 28 (47%) in group II (p=0.01).
Localizations of fractures: wrist - 6 (24%), ankle - 5 (20%), vertebrae -
4 (16%), anatomical neck of the humerus - 4 (16%), others - 6 (24%).
Conclusion: Over the 8-y follow-up period, the number of patients with
osteoporotic fractures has increased by 17.5%. Every 4th patient had a
fracture. Patients with fractures were significantly more likely to take GC
and had OP.
P524
EFFECT OF CLOSE KINETIC CHAIN EXERCISES ALONG
WITH BRISK WALKING ON QUALITY OF LIFE IN PATIENT
WITH POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS
M. Mitra1, A. Kaur1
1MVP's College of Physiotherapy, Nashik, India
Objective: Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterised by a
low BMD and increased risk of fractures. The quality of life is closely
related to the presence of osteoporosis and its complications as fractures.
Menopausal women represent the most important segment of population
at risk. Treatment of these patients has to be comprehensive and include
both, pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions. The aim
of this study was to investigate how close kinetic chain exercises and
brisk walking for osteoporosis in the duration of 6 weeks can impact
quality of life in patients with postmenopausal osteoporosis.
Methods: A randomised single-blind randomised controlled prospective
trial study, which included 54 women with postmenopausal osteoporosis
diagnosed. Exclusion criteria were secondary osteoporosis, lumbar sciat-
ica, pacemaker, cardiorespiratory instability, arrhythmia, malignant dis-
ease, neurological diseases, severe knee OA, people involve in any phys-
ical exercises in past 6 months. Patients were randomly assigned to two
groups: the first group of patients in exercises group, the second group is
control group of patients who did not practice exercises. Close kinetic
exercises were practiced 4 times a week and brisk walking was advised
for 30 min 4 times in week. Quality of life was determined with a specific
questionnaire Qualeffo-41.
Results: Mean age of Patients were 60.6±6.7 y; The results showed,
significant statistical difference in terms of pain, physical activity, social
life, the perception of own health between the groups (p<0.0001).
Conclusion: Patients who practice close kinetic chain exercises and brisk
walking for osteoporosis have a significantly better quality of life than
patients who do not perform exercises.
P525
REGIONAL FEATURES OF AGE-RELATED LOSS OF BONE
MINERAL DENSITY ACCORDING TO DXA
A. Adamenka1, E. Rudenka2
1Republic Clinical Medical Center, Zhdanovichi agro-town, 2Belarusian
State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus
Objective: To identify regional features of age-related loss of BMD
according to the results of DXA in elderly and old women.
Methods: The BMD was assessed with DXA by Lunar Prodigy
Advance, GE, USA, 2018 in the lumbar spine (LS) (BMD L1-L4,
g/cm2; T-score L1-L4, standard deviation (SD)) and femoral neck (FN)
(BMD region total, g/cm2; T-score region total, SD). Vertebral fracture
assessment in the lateral projection carried out as necessary. Statistical
processing was performed using the program Statistica 10.0 (Stat Soft
Inc., USA).
Results: There were examined 27 postmenopausal women (n=27)
aged 70 y and older (mean age 75.3±4.5 y). The initial BMD of all
participants on average were 0.96 (±0.15) in the LS, 0.75 (±0.09) in
the FN of the left femur, 0.73 (±0.07) g/cm2 in the FN of the right
femur. The rate of involutive bone mass reduction was estimated
based on the results of dynamic changes in BMD at 12, 24, and 36
months. After 36 months of follow-up the BMD of the LS signifi-
cantly decreased by 0.5% (p=0.001), the BMD of the FN of the left
femur significantly decreased by 5.2% (p=8.2×10-7), and the BMD
of the FN of the right femur significantly decreased by 5.9%.%
(p=0.0003). The average rate of decrease in BMD in women with
osteoporosis was 0.17% per year in the LS, 1.97% in the FN of the
left femur and 1.73% in the FN of the right femur.
Conclusion: The difference in the rate of decrease in the BMD of the
lumbar spine and the proximal femurs was associated with the presence of
artifacts that overestimate the value of the average BMD of the lumbar
spine and have a false positive effect on the change in BMD in dynamics
(vertebral deformities - 37.0%; degenerative- dystrophic changes leading
to additional pathological ossification - 40.8%). It is preferable to evaluate
the effectiveness of medical treatment of osteoporosis based on the results
of BMD of the proximal femurs, which will allow you to get the correct
result and reduce the time of examination of elderly and senile patients.
S276
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P526
BONE MINERAL DENSITY IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS WITH AND WITHOUT
DIABETIC NEPHROPATHY
S. Monov1, R. Shumnalieva1, D. Monova2
1Medical University - Sofia, Dept. of Rheumatology, 2Medical
University - Sofia, Medical Institute - MIA, Sofia, Bulgaria
Objective: Diabetes mellitus and osteoporosis are both common human
diseases. Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is characterized by the presence of
pathological quantities of urine albumin excretion, diabetic glomerular
lesions, and loss of glomerular filtration rate in diabetics. Little evidence
has been reported on relationships between BMD and albuminuria. The
aim of this study is to compare the BMD in postmenopausal women with
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with and without DN.
Methods: We retrospectively analysed the BMD of the lumbar spine and
femur using DXA in 84 postmenopausal women with T2DM with (39)
and without (45) DN. The serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, total
alkaline phosphatase, and urine albumin excretion were measured in all
participants. Diagnosis of albuminuria was based on albumin-creatinine
ratio.
Results: Age, BMI and time since menopause were not significantly
different between the two groups. The T-scores of basal BMD at L4 were
significantly lower in patients with DN (-0.94±0.40) compared to patients
without nephropathy. No significant differences in serum creatinine were
detected between two groups of patients. Our data suggest that ACR was
negatively associated with lumbar spine and femoral neck BMD.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that postmenopausal women with DN
have a lower BMD and are at increased risk of osteoporosis in the lumbar
spine compared with postmenopausal women without DN. ACR was
negatively associated with lumbar spine and femur neck BMD. One of
the explanations that have been proposed for the association between
albuminuria and osteoporosis is that albuminuria is associated with re-
duced bone blood flow, resulting in a decreased rate of bone remodeling
and the development of osteoporosis.
P527
QUANTIFYING THE EMPLOYER BURDEN OF PERSISTENT
MUSCULOSKELETAL PAIN AT A LARGE EMPLOYER IN
THE UK: A NON INTERVENTIONAL, RETROSPECTIVE
STUDY OF ROLLS-ROYCE EMPLOYEE DATA
D. Roomes1, L. Abraham2, R. Russell2, C. Beck2, K. Halsby2, R. Wood3,
M. O'Brien3, L. Massey3, K. Hart3, K. Burton4
1Rolls-Royce plc, Derby, 2Pfizer Inc., Tadworth, 3Adelphi Real World,
Bollington, 4University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, UK
Objective: Quantify the employer burden of persistent musculoskeletal
(MSK) pain to a large UK employer (Rolls-Royce [RR]).
Methods: A retrospective, longitudinal cohort study of RR UK em-
ployees indexed (Jan 2016 to Dec 2018) on their first MSK-related oc-
cupational health (OH) management referral (a proxy for persistent MSK
pain) using linked OH and human resources data. Cases were matched
1:1 to controls without persistent MSK pain on birth year, gender and job
role. All-cause and MSK-related OH referrals, sickness absence days and
costs of absences (direct + indirect) were compared between cases and
controls at 12 months’ follow-up (FU).
Results: 2382 matched case-control pairs were analysed (mean age: 46 y;
male: 82%; works/staff/management: 50%/38%/12%; mean FU: 31
months). Most (78%) cases were indexed on back pain (36%), lower limb
disorder (23%) or upper limb disorder (20%). Significant differences in
outcomes were observed between cases and controls within 12 months’
FU (Table).
Table. OH referrals, sickness absences and costs of absences for cases and
controls within 12 months’ FU
Mean (SD) [total] – unless
otherwise stated
Cases
Controls
OH Referrals
MSK-related
1.2 (0.5) [2,902]
-
≥1 additional referral
post-index, n (%)
439 (18)
-
All-cause
1.3 (0.6) [3,136]
0.1 (0.3) [135]
≥1 referral, n (%)
2382 (100)
118 (5)
Sickness absence days
MSK-related
16.5 (45.2) [39,200]
-
≥1 sickness absence, n (%)
807 (34)
-
All-cause
34.6 (62.1) [82,341]
8.2 (31.2) [19,628]
≥1 sickness absence, n (%)
1774 (74)
1049 (44)
Costs of absences (£K)
MSK-related
21 (59) [50,099]
-
All-cause
44 (81) [105,567]
11 (45) [25,676]
P<0.0001 for all comparisons
Conclusion: Cases took significantly more sickness absence days vs.
matched controls, resulting in higher costs to RR. Annual costs of ab-
sences equated to £105 million (≈82,000 days lost) for cases; 47% of
which were MSK-related. These unique data provide evidence of the
employer burden caused by persistent MSK pain.
P528
CORELATION BETWEEN TMJ JOINT DYSFUNCTION AND
CERVICAL SPINE DYSFUNCTION
G. Msp1, M. Mitra1, A. Kaur1, K. Sanghvi1
1MVP's College of Physiotherapy, Nashik, India
Objective: The temporomandibular joint is directly related to the cervical
and scapular region. This study aimed to assess any possible relationship
between temporomandibular dysfunction (TMD) and cervical spine dys-
function (CSD).Methods: Total 30 volunteers,15 volunteers that were
presenting clinical signs and symptoms of TMD and15 volunteers that
were presenting CSD according to Temporomandibular Dysfunction
Assessment Questionnaire and Neck disability Index respectively were
selected for this study. Individuals having TMD were assessed for any
signs and symptoms of CSD using Neck disability Index, Index of
Cervical Mobility and VAS score. Individuals having CSD were assessed
for TMD using Temporomandibular Dysfunction Assessment
Questionnaire, Mandibular Mobility Index and VAS score.
Results: Correlation test (p≤0.05) was performed to verify the relation-
ship between CSD and TMD. The increase in TMD signs and symptoms
was accompanied by increase in CSD severity.
Conclusion: The result of this study concluded that TMD is accompanied
with CSD and vice versa.
P529
EFFECTS OF SENSORY MOTOR STIMULATION AND
KINESIO TAPING ON DROOLING IN SPASTIC CEREBRAL
PALSY CHILDREN
A. Kaur1, R. Kaur2, M. Mitra1
1MVP's college of Physiotherapy, Nashik, 2Kaur Physiotherapy
Rehabilitation Center, Hyderabad, India
Objective: Oral motor and oral sensory issues are frequently observed in
children with cerebral palsy. Delay in feeding, failure to thrive, manage-
ment of oral secretions, phonological and articulation development is
often impaired. Purpose to study the effect of physiotherapy intervention
to control drooling. This study is conducted to assess the effectiveness of
sensorimotor stimulation and kinesiotaping in controlling drooling in
children with cerebral palsy.
S277
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: Children diagnosed with cerebral palsy and satisfying the in-
clusion criteria was be selected for the study, severity and frequency of
drooling (Thomas-Stonells drooling scale) drooling quotient and drooling
impact scale was used as outcome measure.
Results: Paired t-test of significance will be used to estimate the differ-
ence in the drooling severity and frequency, drooling quotient and impact
of drooling before and after treatment. There was a significant reduction
in drooling frequency, severity, drooling quotient and drooling impact
scale post treatment As the p value was <0.0001
Conclusion: The study concludes that sensory motor stimulation,
kinesiotaping and activities are effective in controlling drooling in cere-
bral palsy children.
P530
IMPACT OF RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS ACTIVITY AND
ANTICYCLIC CITRULLINATED PEPTIDES IN BONE
MINERAL DENSITY DYNAMICS DURING THE 12 MONTHS
THERAPY OF DENOSUMAB
P. Kovalenko1, I. Dydykina1, A. Smirnov1, E. Nasonov1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: As it known the inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
leads to local and generalized bone loss. The use of such new
antiresorptive drug as denosumab (monoclonal antibody that binds
RANKL) decreases an osteoclast activity, increases BMD and also has
potential influence on erosive process in RA. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the effects of denosumab on BMD depending on RA activity and
anticyclic citrullinated peptides (aCCP) positivity/negativity.
Methods: 66 postmenopausal women (mean age 59.6±7.4) with RA
(mean duration 17.7±10.4 y) and osteoporosis (OP) received s/c
denosumab 60 mg every 6 months pro 12 months. At baseline and after
12 months it was carried out DXA at 3 sites: lumbar spine (L1-L4), hip
neck (HN) and distal forearm (DF) and x-ray of hands and feet (Sharp/van
der Heijde score). RF-positive were 47 (72%), aCCP – 48 (74%) patients.
34 (49%) patients have continued glucocorticoids (GC). In previous stud-
ies we showed the significant evaluation of BMD in general (regardless of
GC intake), the influence of different factors on BMD dynamics. The
present study analyzed the BMD change in aCCP ± groups of patients
and with different RA activity levels. The mean DAS-28 was 4.01±1.02
and it was not changed significantly after 1 y of therapy. According to
DAS-28, 5 (7.6%) patients had 0 level of RA activity, 7 (10.6%) – 1, 45
(68.1%) – 2 and 9 (13.6%) – 3, respectively.
Results: After therapy it was noted that in group of patients with RA
activity level 0 it was not any significant changes of BMD, probably
because of small number of group. In group 2 (RA activity level 1)
BMD in L1-L4 was significantly increased (p=0.02). In group 3, the
largest group of patients in this study, the significant increase of BMD
(p<0.05) was noted in L1-L4, hip neck and total hip. In group 4 the
significant increase of BMD was noted in L1-L4 and total hip. In aCCP
“+” patients the mean BMD was significantly increased (p<0.05) in L1-
L4, hip neck, total hip and distal forearm while in aCCP “-“ patients the
mean BMD was significantly increased only in L1-L4 and total hip.
Conclusion: Our study showed that the increase of BMD after the 12
months of denosumab therapy did not depend on initial RA activity. The
increase of BMD in L1-L4 was noted in patients with low, moderate and
high activity, as well as in hip in patients with moderate and high activity.
Also it was shown that the increase of BMD in main sites of the skeleton
is observed regardless of aCCP positivity/negativity.
P531
FRAX BASED OSTEOPOROSIS MANAGEMENT PATHWAY
FOR UKRAINIAN MEN
V. Povoroznyuk1, H. Johansson2, N. Grygorieva1, M. Lorentzon3, A.
Musienko1, N. C. Harvey4, E. V. McCloskey5, E. Liu2, J. A. Kanis5
1D. F. Chebotarev Institute of Gerontology NAMS of Ukraine, Kyiv,
Ukraine, 2Sahlgrenska Osteoporosis Centre, Institute of Medicine,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Mary McKillop
Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic University,
Melbourne, Australia, 4MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK, 5Centre for Metabolic Bone
Diseases, University of Sheffield Medical School, Sheffield, UK
Objective: Ukrainian FRAX model for Ukraine was launched in 2016
and intervention thresholds for women were published in 2019. The im-
pact of intervention thresholds for Ukrainian men was not explored. The
aim of this research was to assess the impact of the use of these thresholds
in Ukrainian men.
Methods: 653 men (age 60.5±11.8, range 40-88 y) referred as outpatients
to the Dmitry F. Chebotarev Institute of Gerontology of the National
Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine for the evaluation of skeletal
status were studied. The 10-y probabilities of hip fracture and a major
osteoporotic fracture were calculated using the Ukrainian FRAX model
(version 4.2) with and without femoral neck BMD.
Results: 174 of 653 men (26.6%) had a prior fragility fracture and would
be eligible for treatment on this basis. From the 479 males without a prior
fracture, 447 were at low risk (68.5%) and were not be eligible for further
assessment of fracture probability. The intermediate category of risk com-
prised 32 men (4.9%) in whom FRAX was recalculated with the inclusion
of femoral neck BMD. Of these 23 were categorized at low risk (3.5%)
and 9 at high risk (1.4%). Fracture probability calculated with BMD was
higher than that without BMD. The disposition of the cohort in men was
markedly different from that for women. 28% of men and 57% of women
were eligible for antiosteoporotic treatment. The eligibility for treatment
by FRAX alone was higher in women than in men (6.1 vs. 1.4% had a
prior fragility fracture and were eligible for treatment). The requirement
for BMD testing was also higher in women than in men (18.3 vs. 4.9%,
respectively).
Conclusion: We have examined the assessment of fracture risk in
Ukrainian men and compared their disposition with that of a referral
population of women. 27% of men referred for skeletal assessment had
a prior fracture that categorized eligibility for treatment, and this charac-
teristic was less frequent than in Ukrainian women (51% of referrals).
P532
BURDEN ON CAREGIVERS OF HIP FRACTURE SURVIVORS:
A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
H. K. Dias1, N. Rathnayake, T. Abeygunasekara1, S. Lekamwasam2
1Dept. of Nursing, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, University of
Ruhuna, 2Dept. of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka
Objective: To determine the caregivers’ (CG)’ burden of hip fracture
(HF) patients and factors associated with CG burden.
Methods: A systematic search was done in PubMed using the terms
“caregiver burden” or “caregiver outcome” or “caregiver stress” and
“hip fracture” or “femur fracture” or “osteoporotic fracture”. Original
studies (English language) on CG burden of HF patients published during
last 10 y were selected. Review articles, meta-analyses and case reports
were excluded and we followed the PRISMA guidelines.
Results: The original search resulted in 100 publications and based on
selection criteria 11 studies (3 qualitative and 8 quantitative) were con-
sidered for this study. Quantitative studies have used different tools such
as CG burden questionnaire, Zarit burden interview, SF-36 survey and
pain scales. The majority of primary CG were either spouse or daughter of
the patient and unemployed. CG had experienced moderate to high level
of physical and emotional burden and limitations of personal freedom,
emotional stability and self-efficacy. They have reported physical pain,
limited rest and sleep, lack of social support and exposure to information
and high medical costs. CG burden has shown significant associations
S278
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
with system related factors (health care cost for treatments and palliative
care, available health facilities, social support), patient related factors
(existing comorbidities, functional status and activities of daily living,
cognitive status) and CG related factors (age, self-efficacy and lack of
exposure to information).
Conclusion: CG of HF survivors report moderate to high level of burden
with limitations of physical, emotional and general health status. CG
burden is associated with a multitude of factors related to system, patient
and CG.
P533
HOW OFTEN DO MEDICAL DOCTORS ASSESS CALCIUM
AND PHOSPHATE LEVEL IN THE BLOOD SERUM IN
PATIENTS WITH VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY?
N. N. Katamadze1, A. S. Shutova1, H. R. Fargieva1, V. S. Glazieva2, A.
Yu. Zhukov1, A. A. Povaliaeva1, E. A. Pigarova1, L. K. Dzeranova1, I. M.
Belovalova1, I. I. Dedov1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, 2Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Moscow, Russia
Objectives: Vitamin D is required to maintain a normal blood level of
calcium and phosphate, which are of crucial importance for normal bone
mineralization, muscle contraction, nerve conduction, and general cellu-
lar function in all cells of the body. Vitamin D deficiency causes a de-
crease in the efficiency of intestinal calcium and phosphorus absorption.
Adequate levels of calcium and phosphate ensure optimum PTH secre-
tion, which in turn, stimulates the production of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin
D3 by the kidney. The aim of our survey was to find out the level of
awareness on the need for assessment of calcium and phosphate in pa-
tients with vitamin D deficiency among healthcare providers.
Methods: We conducted a national online-based survey to collect the
data on how frequently medical doctors evaluate calcium status by mea-
suring total calcium, ionized calcium, calcium corrected for albumin and
phosphate levels in patients with vitamin D deficiency. The survey in-
cluded 704 physicians who specialized in various fields. Endocrinologists
accounted for 80% of them.
Results: According to the survey results, the rate of physicians who
measure total serum calcium, ionized calcium, calcium corrected for al-
bumin and phosphate level in patients with vitamin D deficiency account-
ed for 70.5%, 69.1%, 41.9%, and 65.6% of medical doctors respectively.
The survey revealed that 92.3% of all questioned endocrinologists assess
calcium and phosphate metabolism.
Conclusion: Sequestration of the assessment of the parameters of
calcium-phosphorus metabolism before the isolated determination of
the level of vitamin D, including in the dynamics of its correction, is
dangerous due to the potential underdiagnosis of various forms of hyper-
parathyroidism and the potentiation of hypercalcemia. Our survey re-
vealed that endocrinologists assess calcium and phosphate levels in the
blood serum more frequently in compare with other medical profes-
sionals. Raising awareness among health care providers in various fields
on this matter will prevent mismanagement in terms of bone and mineral
metabolism and will assist to prevent deleterious effects on patient’s
wellbeing.
P534
EFFICIENCY OF PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR LOWER JAW
FRACTURES
K. Kaladze1, O. Poleshchuk2, S. Kulanthaivel3, V. Kaliberdenko4, K.
Balasundaram5, O. Galkina6
1Dept. of Dental Surgery and Maxillofacial Surgery, V.I. Vernadsky
Crimean Federal University, Simferopol, Russia, 2Dept. of Propaedeutic
of Dentistry, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal University, Simferopol,
Russia, 3Divisional Health (Zone - 6, Division - 67), Greater Chennai
Corporation - Public Health and Medical Services Dept., Chennai,
India, 4Dept. of Internal medicine No.2, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean
Federal University, Simferopol, Russia, 5Dept. of Internal Medicine
No.2, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal University, Simferopol, Russia,
6Dept. of Propaedeutic of Dentistry, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal
University, Simferopol, Russia
Objective: Acute maxillofacial trauma, accompanied by fractures of the
lower jaw, more or less pronounced damage to the surrounding soft
tissues, blood vessels and nerves, affects the entire body of the victim.
Bone densitometry methods allow quantitatively, with high accuracy
(from 2-5%) to determine the loss of bone mass in various parts of the
skeleton at the stages of a person's life. This study aimed to study the
structural and functional state of bone tissue in patients with mandible
fracture and the effect of osteogenon preparation on fracture consolida-
tion and bone tissue remodeling.
Methods: The study included 80 male patients with mandible fracture,
aged 18-58 y. All patients first underwent splinting of bone fragments
with a splint-brace with hook loops according to Tigerstedt. The teeth
were set in the bite and fixed with a rubber rod.
Osteogenon (ossein-hydroxyapatite complex), used for systemic
osteoporosis’s prevention and treatment. Course is 2 tablets 2t/d for 14
d. In group II, treatment was carried out according to the generally ac-
cepted method (splinting, anti-inflammatory therapy). To assess bone
metabolism, blood calcium and phosphorus were examined.
Results: From the initial data on the structural and functional properties
of bone tissue in patients with mandible fracture made it possible to note
that 40 (50%) of them had osteopenic syndrome, with high degree of
reliability in comparison with the norm. Decreased levels of calcium
and phosphorus in blood were noted. After treatment, the densitometric
parameters significantly increased in group I. It remained within the nor-
mal range, but had a tendency to decrease in group II. Positive changes in
mineral metabolism, was more pronounced in group I. So, we noted that
group I treated with osteogenon had a double effect on bone tissue me-
tabolism with stimulating and inhibitory effect on osteoblasts and osteo-
clasts respectively which is accompanied by an increase in calcium
absorption.
Conclusion: Initial osteopenia with corresponding changes in densito-
metric and metabolic parameters is a predisposing factor in the develop-
ment of mandible fracture. The greatest effect on the restoration of the
structural and functional properties of bone tissue by the use of the drug
osteogenon.
P535
LEVELS OF BONE METABOLISM MARKERS IN
ADOLESCENTS WITH IDIOPATHIC SCOLIOSIS
O. Galkina1, V. Kaliberdenko2, Z. Dovbnya3, O. Poleshchuk3, S.
Kulanthaivel4, K. Balasundaram5
1Dept. of Propaedeutic of Dentistry, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal
University, Simferopol, Russia, 2Dept. of Internal medicine No.2, V.I.
Vernadsky Crimean Federal University, Simferopol, Russia, 3Dept. of
Propaedeutic of Dentistry, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal University,
Simferopol, Russia, 4Divisional Health (Zone - 6, Division - 67), Greater
Chennai Corporation - Public Health and Medical Services Dept.,
Chennai, India, 5Dept. of Internal Medicine No.2, V.I. Vernadsky
Crimean Federal University, Simferopol, Russia
Objective: The steady increase in the incidence of idiopathic scoliosis
(IS) in young people necessitates the search for informative prognostic
markers of the progression of this pathology, which is required for their
early treatment and prevention. This study aimed to study the levels of
markers of bone metabolism in young people with IS.
Methods: We observed 152 adolescents aged 15-16 y (62 boys, 90 girls)
with varying degrees of spinal deformity and 20 volunteers in control
group. The average age of the patients were 15.26±0.04 y. The levels of
markers of inert metabolism, such as osteocalcin in the blood serum (an
indicator of osteosynthesis) and deoxypyridinoline in the urine (an
S279
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
indicator of osteoresorption) were studied. The control group consisted of
20 healthy volunteers.
Results: Our study has revealed a decrease in the concentration of
osteocalcin in 96 (63.16%) adolescents. The indicator in the group of
patients with IS was 76.44±0.66 ng/ml, which is significantly lower
(p<0.001) in comparison with the control group (96.66±2.17 ng/ml) and
the age norm (93.4±14.1 ng/ml). This indicated the inhibition of the
osteosynthesis process due to a decrease in the activity of osteoblasts.
Along with this, an increase in the level of deoxypyridinoline was noted
in 41 (26.97%) patients. In the group of patients with IS, the indicator was
determined as 51.78±1.08 nmolDPD/mmolCr, which is significantly
higher (p<0.001) compared to the control group (31.43±1.72 nmolDPD/
mmolCr). In comparison with the generally accepted laboratory norm (no
more than 59 nmolDPD/mmolCr), the marker value approached the upper
(critical) limit. This result indicated an increased level of osteoresorption
due to increased osteoclastic activity. A detailed analysis of the data ob-
tained shows that the progressive change in the indicators were accompa-
nied by an increase in the degree of curvature of the spine.
Conclusion: To assess bone metabolism and early prevention of the
progression of the degree of curvature of the spine in young people with
IS, it is advisable to periodically determine the levels of markers of bone
metabolism.
P536
TRANS CRI PT O M E A N A LY SES R EV E A LED T H E
DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED GENES AND PATHWAYS
ASSOCIATED WITH STEROID- INDUCED OSTEONECROSIS
OF THE FEMORAL HEAD
C. Wang1, C. X. Di1, Y. Guo1
1Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Biomedical Informatics & Genomics Center, School of Life
Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China
Objective: Steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head (SONFH),
which is caused by long-term and high-dose glucocorticoid use, has been
accounting for 57% of the total femoral head necrosis. Numerous genes
changed expression in bone may be the potential pathogenic factor of
SONFH. However, previous researches used cell lines and mouse models
to simulate the SONFH which cannot truly represent the response to
glucocorticoids in human. The objective of our project is to identify the
differential expression genes (DEGs) in the femoral head from patients
with SONFH and healthy controls to find the new targets for SONFH
therapy.
Methods: A total of 6 necrotic femoral head samples and 12 normal
control samples were obtained from patients. After RNA extraction, re-
verse transcription, and adaptor ligation, the library was sequenced by the
Illumina platform. Clean reads were aligned to human hg19 build and
reads count for each gene was extracted by featureCount software with
gencode v19 annotation file. Then, we identified the DEGs via the
DESeq2 R package from Bioconductor. Finally, we did KEGG pathway
enrichment analyses for DEGs by cluster profile R package.
Results: A total of 735 genes were identified as significant DEGs
(P≤0.05) in the femoral head between SONFH patients and healthy con-
trols. Among them, 482 genes were upregulated and 253 genes were
downregulated in the necrotic femoral head, respectively. KEGG enrich-
ment analyses identified the DEGs enriched at 28 pathways (P≤0.05), the
novel and most enriched pathway term was protein digestion and absorp-
tion (P=2.06x10-7), furthermore, Toll-like receptor signaling pathway
(P=5.2 x10-3) which have been proved associated with SONFH is signif-
icantly changed as well.
Conclusion: Overall, by performing DEG and KEGG pathway analyses,
we identified hundreds of genes dysregulated in the necrotic femoral head
compared to healthy controls. In addition, the DEGs enrichment in mul-
tiple pathways could provide new insights into the SONFH
pathophysiology.
Acknowledgements: This study is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31970569); Natural Science Basic
Research Plan of Shaanxi Province (2019JM-119).
P537
EFFICACY OF ANTIRESORPTIVE TREATMENT IN
OSTEOPOROTIC OLDER ADULTS: RESULTS OF A
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND META-ANALYSIS OF
RANDOMISED CLINICAL TRIALS
B. A. Cedeno-Veloz1, J. Erviti Lopez2, M. Gutiérrez- Valencia2, L.
Leache Alegría2, L. C. Saiz Fernandez2, A. M. Rodriguez-Garcia1, M.
Sanchez Latorre1, R. Ramirez Velez3, M. Izquierdo3, N. Martinez-Velilla1
1Geriatric Dept., Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, 2Unit of
Innovation and Organization, Navarre Health Service, Pamplona, 3Dept.
of Health Sciences, Public University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain
Objective: Antiresorptive drugs are usually the first-line treatment in
older adults(1). However, there is no clear evidence in older adults(2).
A study based on screening for osteoporosis in older women did not
reduce the incidence of osteoporosis-related fractures(3). The purpose
of our update study was to determine actual evidence of antiresorptive
treatment in this specific population.
Methods: Database Search: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials, ISI Web of Science, and Scopus will be
searched for studies from inception until 31th January 2020 without lan-
guage restriction.
Selection Criteria
Types of studies: RCTs
Participants: older adults (65 years old and above) with osteoporosis with
or without previous fragility fracture.
Intervention: antiresorptive treatment with or without calcium/vitamin D
as compared to placebo or a nonpharmacological intervention with or
without calcium/vitamin D.
Comparator: No treatment
Outcomes: Primary outcome: patients with hip fracture. Secondary out-
come: other fractures
Data Extraction and Management: Two review authors independently
extracted data from the included trials with a previously prepared data
extraction form. Any differences between review authors were resolved
by discussion. The data extraction form included details of study design,
randomization, blinding, assessment of risk of bias, duration of treatment,
follow-up, baseline characteristics, number of participants, lost to follow-
up, interventions, outcomes and statistical analysis.
Analysis: We performed the meta-analysis according to the Cochrane
handbook version 6(12). If a meta-analysis could not be performed, a
narrative description of the results was provided.
Results: Alendronate (3 studies), clodronate (1 study), denosumab (1
study, etidronate (1 study), risedronate (1 study) and zoledronate (3 stud-
ies) were assessed as drug treatments against hip fracture. Antiresorptive
treatment showed lower risk of hip fracture than control group: RR=0.75
(95%CI 0.64 to 0.87), 10 studies, I2=30%. This means a RAR of 0.41%
(95%CI 0.13 to 0.69) and a NNT of 241 (95%CI 144 to 771).
Considering any type of fractures, treatment was associated with lower
risk: RR=0.67 (95%CI 0.62-0.71), 9 studies, I2=39%; RAR=4.43%
(95%CI 3.68 to 5.18), NNT=23 (95%CI 19 to 27).
Conclusion: Antiresorptive drugs are widely used as a first-line drug
therapy for preventing osteoporotic fracture and their efficacy for hip
fracture prevention is confirmed in this study. However, the absolute
magnitude of benefit is small (NNT of 241) and studies show moderate
heterogeneity. The main limitations are related to the quality of the stud-
ies, which showed unclear/high risk of bias. The limited number of stud-
ies in some of the subgroup analyses is also a limitation. Antiresorptive
drugs do have a significant effect on preventing hip fracture. Alendronate,
denosumab, risedronate and zoledronate may have a significant role on
preventing hip fracture. Evidence on very older adults come from post
S280
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
hoc study with inconsistence results. More randomized controlled trials in
very older osteoporotic adults are needed.
P538
CONSTRUCTION OF NON-CODING RNA MEDIATED GENE
EXPRESSION REGULATORY NETWORK RELATED TO
STEROID-INDUCED OSTEONECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL
HEAD
C. Wang1, C. X. Di1, Y. Guo1
1Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Biomedical Informatics & Genomics Center, School of Life
Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China
Objective: Steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head (SONFH)
is a challenging disorder caused by long-term and high-dose glucocorti-
coid use. As shown previously, gene dysregulation plays an important
role in the pathogenesis of SONFH. Exploring the way of gene expres-
sion regulation is helpful for further understanding the mechanism of
disease and may provide a basis for drug development. The object of this
project is to construct a non-coding RNA-mediated gene expression reg-
ulatory network for all dysregulated mRNA in the necrotic femoral head.
Methods: A total of 6 necrotic femoral head samples and 12 normal
control samples were obtained from volunteers. Total RNA was isolated
and used for RNA-seq library preparation. The expression of mRNA,
lncRNA, and miRNA was measured for each sample. Sequencing reads
of mRNA and lncRNA were aligned to human hg19 build and raw reads
count for each mRNA and lncRNA was extracted by featureCount soft-
ware with gencode v19 annotation file. Then, the differential expression
genes (DEGs) were identified via the DESeq2 package. The target
mRNA of miRNA was gotten from MirSNPInTarget, MirSNPInTarget,
miRWalk and miRDB databases, the target lncRNA of miRNA were
gotten from the lncBaseV2 database. At last, we constructed two types
network: 1. lncRNA-↓- miRNA↑-mRNA↓; 2. lncRNA↑-miRNA↓-
>mRNA↑.
A total of 735 differentially expressed mRNA were identified (P≤0.05)
with 482 mRNA upregulated and 253 mRNA downregulated in the ne-
crotic femoral head, respectively. And we found 176 differentially
expressed lncRNA (P≤0.05) with 78 lncRNA upregulated and 98
lncRNA downregulated in the necrotic femoral head. In addition, 111
differentially expressed miRNA were identified (P≤0.05), among them,
77 miRNA were upregulated and 34 miRNA were downregulated in the
necrotic femoral head, respectively. Through the integration of DEGs
(mRNA, lncRNA, miRNA) and miRNA targets from several databases,
we constructed two types of regulatory networks containing 699 mRNA,
134 lncRNA, and 106 miRNA.
Overall, we performed <?thyc=RNA-seq for total RNA of femoral head
samples from SONFH patients and controls and then identified differen-
tially expressed mRNA, lncRNA, and miRNA. Integrated with target
gene information from multiple databases, we constructed a non-coding
RNA mediated gene expression regulatory network involved almost all
DEGs, this would provide a wealth of bases for the analysis of the mech-
anism of SONFH.
Acknowledgements: This study is supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31970569); Natural Science Basic
Research Plan of Shaanxi Province (2019JM-119).
P539
TRANSCRIPTOME ANALYSIS REVEALED HMOX1 IS A
CANDIDATE GENE RELATED TO THE PATHOGENESIS OF
FEMORAL HEAD NECROSIS AND IS REGULATED BY
MULTIPLE MIRNA
C. Wang1, C. X. Di1, Y. Guo1
1Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Biomedical Informatics & Genomics Center, School of Life
Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China
Objective: Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is a disease caused
by reduced blood flow to bones in the joints which leads to reduced cell
nutrition, especially oxygen. Although bones can adapt to this microen-
vironment by regulating the expression of related genes, however, it is
difficult for cells to adapt to environmental changes when these genes are
expressed abnormally, and then cause cell apoptosis and death. We spec-
ulate that there is a dysregulation in the expression of genes related to
hypoxia adaptation in the necrotic femoral head. The purpose of this
study is to identify these genes and reveal the non-coding RNA-mediated
regulatory mode.
Methods: A total of 6 necrotic femoral head samples and 12 normal
control samples were obtained from volunteers. The total RNA was ex-
tracted and sequenced by the Illumina platform. Differentially expressed
gene was identified via DESeq2. To construct the miRNA-mediated reg-
ulatory network, we downloaded miRNA target mRNA from
MirSNPInTarget, MirSNPInTarget, miRWalk, and miRDB databases.
Results: A total of 735 differentially expressed mRNA were identified
(P≤0.05), among them, we found HMOX1 which codes the Heme
Oxygenase 1 was downregulated in necrotic femoral head samples
(P=0.042, log2FC=-0.882). It has been shown that overexpressed
HMOX1 could reduce osteoblast apoptosis caused by hypoxia in mice
models, suggesting HMOX1 may also play an important role in the path-
ogenesis of human femoral head necrosis. Integrate miRNA target data-
bases and differentially expressed miRNA data, we found 8 upregulated
miRNA in necrotic femoral head that potentially bound to HMOX1
mRNA sequence, including hsa-miR-218-5p (P=0.025, log2FC=1.07),
hsa-miR-552-5p (P=0.046, log2FC=1.74), hsa-miR-138-5p (P=9.78
x10-5, log2FC=2.28), hsa-miR-4491 (P=0.038, log2FC=1.65), hsa-miR-
199b-3p (P=0.031, log2FC=0.85), hsa-miR- 4761-3p (P=0.040,
log2FC=1.85), hsa-miR-181c-5p (P=0.005, log2FC=0.68), hsa-miR-
130b-5p (P=0.002, log2FC=0.97).
Conclusion: Overall, DEGs analysis identified the downregulation of
HMOX1 in the necrotic femoral head as a candidate factor for the patho-
genesis of ONFH, and multiple upregulated miRNA may act as its ex-
pression regulator.
Acknowledgements: This study is supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31970569); Natural Science Basic
Research Plan of Shaanxi Province (2019JM-119).
P540
MOTIF AND GENE CO-EXPRESSION ANALYSES
IDENTIFIED 4 CANDIDATE TFS REGULATE HMOX1
EXPRESSION IN NECROTIC FEMORAL HEAD
C. Wang1, C. X. Di1, Y. Guo1
1Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Biomedical Informatics & Genomics Center, School of Life
Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China
Objective: Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is a condition
caused by a compromise of the blood supply of the femoral head and
may lead to progressive destruction of the hip joint. We have identified
the downregulation of HMOX1 expression as a candidate marker for
ONFH and constructed a miRNA-mediated regulatory network.
However, there may be other ways involved in the regulation of gene
expression, such as transcription factor (TF) regulation. The object of this
project is to identify whether there are TFs that could bind to the HMOX1
promoter region and regulate its expression.
Methods: Firstly, we compared the expression among all transcripts of
HMOX1 and use the transcript with the highest expression value for the
following analyses. Next, we defined the 2 kb upstream and downstream
of the transcription start site as promoter according to the genecode v19
annotation file and extracted the genome sequence of the promoter via
samtools faidx software. Then, we used fimo software to predict the
binding motif of TFs from the JASPAR database with p-value set to
1×10-4, the TFs have at least one motif found in the HMOX1 promoter
S281
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
was treated as a candidate regulator of HMOX1. Finally, the regulator TF
which expression was lower in the necrotic femoral head and positively
correlated with HMOX1 treats as the true regulator of HMOX1.
Results: By comparing the expression levels of different transcripts of
HMOX1, we found the expression of transcripts ENST00000216117.8
(FPKM: 128.58) was significantly higher than the other four transcripts of
HMOX1 (ENST00000412893.1: 3.27×10-6; ENSG00000100292.12:
2.36; ENST00000481190.1: 1.23; ENST00000494998.1: 0.60). The mo-
tif analyses in the ENST00000216117.8 promoter region found that 535
TFs have at least one motif in this region. Among them, only 7 TFs were
downregulated in the necrotic femoral head, including STAT1, EFNA2,
POU4F2, PRDM1, EOMES, GATA3, TBX21. Coexpression analyses
found that the expression of STAT1 (R=0.495, P=0.037), EOMES
(R=0.615, P=0.007), GATA3 (R=0.527, P=0.025) and TBX21
(R=0.535, P=0.022) were positively correlated with the expression of
HMOX1, suggesting that these four TFs may contribute to the downreg-
ulation of HMOX1 in the necrotic femoral head.
Conclusion: Overall, through motif and gene co-expression analyses, we
identified four TFs which have potential binding ability to the promoter
region of HMOX1 and co-expressed with HMOX1. The project provides
deep insight into the regulatory mechanism of HMOX1 and the methods
used in the present research could be applied to find other dysregulated
genes in the disease.
Acknowledgements: This study is supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31970569); Natural Science Basic
Research Plan of Shaanxi Province (2019JM-119).
P541
M U S C U L O S K E L E T A L H E A L T H I N A N D R O G E N
DEPRIVATION THERAPY (ADT) FOR PROSTATE CANCER
E. Zigoura1, N. Veronese2, A. Floris1, C. Schiavone3, F. Campodonico4,
M. Ennas4, A. Pilotto5
1Bone Unit, Dept. of Geriatric Care, Orthogeriatrics & Rehabilitation,
Galliera Hospital, Genova, 2Dept. of Medicine, University of Palermo,
Palermo, 3Radiotherapy Unit, Dept. of Radiology, Galliera Hospital,
Genova, 4Urology Unit, Dept. of Abdominal Surgery, Galliera
Hospital, Genova, 5Dept. of Geriatric Care, Orthogeriatrics &
Rehabilitation, Galliera Hospital and Dept. of Interdisciplinary
Medicine, University of Bari, Genova, Italy
Objective: In this study we aimed to quantify the prevalence of osteopo-
rosis and sarcopenia in ADT-treated men (>12 weeks) for prostate cancer.
Methods: 49 ADT-treated men (mean age 77 years old, range 58-92)
who referred to our Bone Unit of Galliera Hospital were recruited. Bone
metabolism parameters, before antifracture treatment, were assessed by
the laboratory. BMD was performed by DXA. BMI was calculated.
Muscle strength was measured using hand grip dynamometry (HD).
Body composition was estimated by bioelectrical impedance analysis
(BIA). X-rays of thoracic and lumbar spine were performed.
Results: 33 patients, were already under cholecalciferol supplementation
at the first visit and presented a range of 21-43.4 ng/ml of serum 25-OH
vitamin D. “Naive” patients, who did not take cholecalciferol presented a
range of 4-16.9 ng/mg. Even with low 25-OH vitamin D levels, only 2
cases of secondary hyperparathyroidism were noted. C-terminal collagen
crosslinks (CTX) in serum were high in all of them, with a media of 768.4
pg/ml. All patients were overweight (BMI=27.5±2). HD revealed rela-
tively low muscle strength: 20.8±10 kg. Muscle mass as Skeletal Muscle
Mass Index estimated by BIA was between 8.2 kg/m² and 11.2 kg/m²
with a media of 9.41 kg/m². Only 11 of them had a normal T-score in
DXA, 11 of them were osteoporotic and the 27 were osteopenic. Five of
them had vertebral fractures due to fragility, as detected by X-rays.
Conclusion: ADT treatment can compromise bone and muscle health
with physical function consequences and lose of autonomy. The assess-
ment of muscle mass, muscle strength and bone density should be
included in the routine evaluation of this population. A straight collabo-
ration between bone health specialists, urologists and radiotherapists is
necessary.
P542
T R A N S C R I P T O M E A N A L Y SE S R E V E A L E D TH E
DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED GENES AND PATHWAYS
ASSOCIATED WITH OSTEOPOROSIS
B. Yang1, B. C. Liu1, Y. H. Chang1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital, Xi'an,
China
Objective: Osteoporosis is a disease that increases the risk of frac-
tures due to decreased bone density. As previous studies showed
that dysregulation of bone tissue gene expression which changes
cell function is one of the causes of osteoporosis. Here, we collected
femoral head samples from patients with femoral neck fractures and
patients undergoing femoral head replacement for other non-fracture
reasons. We aim to identify the new gene and pathways involve in
the pathology of osteoporosis via differential gene expression anal-
yses and function enrichment analysis,
Methods: A total of 10 femoral head samples from patients with femoral
neck fractures and 5 control samples were collected. the library was
sequenced by the next generation sequencing platform (Illumina). Raw
data were filtered via trimmomatic software. Clean reads were aligned to
human hg19 build via hisat2 software, raw reads count for each gene was
extracted by featureCount software with gencode v19 annotation file.
Then, the DEGs were identified via the DESeq2 R package from
Bioconductor. Finally, we did GO enrichment analyses for DEGs via
clusterprofile package from Bioconductor.
Results: A total of 693 genes were identified as significant DEGs
(P≤0.05) between osteoporosis patients and controls. Among them, 228
genes were upregulated and 465 genes were downregulated in osteopo-
rosis samples, respectively. GO enrichment analyses identified that the
upregulated genes in osteoporosis samples were enriched at 429 GO
terms (P≤0.05), and the downregulated genes were enriched in 651 GO
terms. Interestingly, the most enriched GO terms of downregulated genes
in osteoporosis samples is Ossification (GO:0001503, P=1.45x10-17), in
addition, there were several other GO terms associated with bone pheno-
type, including extracellular matrix organization (GO:0030198,
P=1.74x10-11), extracellular structure organization (GO:0043062,
P=1.87x10-11), skeletal system morphogenesis (GO:0048705,
P=5.71x10-9), bone development (GO:0060348, P=2.40x10-8), osteo-
blast differentiation (GO:0001649, P=5.71x10-9).
Conclusion: Overall, by performing DEG and GO enrichment analysis,
we identified hundreds of genes downregulated in osteoporosis samples,
and they enriched in multiple biological processes related to bone forma-
tion. It further showed that the dysregulation of gene expression is a key
factor in the occurrence of osteoporosis and would provide potential
candidate genes for further mechanism research.
Acknowledgements: This study is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31970569); Natural Science Basic
Research Plan of Shaanxi Province (2019JM-119).
P543
CONSTRUCTION OF NONCODING RNA MEDIATED GENE
EXPRESSION REGULATORY NETWORK RELATED TO
OSTEOPOROSIS
B. Yang1, B. C. Liu1, Y. H. Chang1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital, Xi'an, China
Objective: Osteoporosis occurs when bone density decreases, which is
manifested by thinning and weakening of bones. By comparing the gene
S282
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
expression of the femoral head from osteoporosis patients and normal
controls, we showed that the osteoporosis downregulated gene enriched
in multiple bone development GO terms. Dysregulation of gene expres-
sion is a pivotal factor for the pathogenesis of osteoporosis, however, the
mechanism underlying the dysregulated mRNA is unknown. The object
of this project is to construct a noncoding RNA-mediated gene expression
regulatory network for downregulated genes in osteoporosis samples.
Methods: To construct the noncoding RNA-mediated gene expression
regulatory network, we measured mRNA, lncRNA, and miRNA expres-
sion by the next generation sequencing technology for 10 femoral head
samples from patients with femoral neck fractures and 5 control samples.
The differential expression genes (DEGs) were identified via the DESeq2
package. The target mRNA of miRNA were gotten from
MirSNPInTarget, MirSNPInTarget, miRWalk, and miRDB databases,
the target lncRNA of miRNA was gotten from the lncBaseV2 database.
Finally, we constructed the network for downregulated mRNA:
lncRNA↓-miRNA↑- mRNA↓.
Results: We identified 35 upregulated miRNA and 99 upregulated
lncRNA in osteoporosis samples. We integrated the above results,
miRNA target genes from several databases, and the differentially
expressed mRNA from our previous results, we constructed a gene ex-
pression regulatory network involved 229 mRNA, 68 lncRNA, and 33
miRNA. In this network, the mean target mRNA number of each miRNA
was about 30, the mean target lncRNA number of each miRNA was 2.
Conclusion: We constructed a gene expression regulatory network
through the integration of differentially expressed mRNA, lncRNA, and
miRNA and miRNA potential targets from several databases. This would
provide insight into the pathogenesis of osteoporosis.
Acknowledgements: This study is supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31970569); Natural Science Basic
Research Plan of Shaanxi Province (2019JM-119).
P544
E F F E C T
O F
C O M B I N E D
T H E R A P Y
O N
T H E
INFLAMMATION BIOMARKERS IN PATIENTS WITH
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
S. S. Spitsina1, L. N. Shilova2, A. A. Trofimenko3, E. E. Mozgovaya3, S.
A. Bedina3
1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and
Experimental Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”; Volgograd State Medical
University, 2Volgograd State Medical University, 3Federal State
Budgetary Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and Experimental
Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: To evaluate efficiency of combination therapy including
infliximab (IF) in RA patients by means of inflammation markers
(ESR, CRP) and serum pro-inflammatory (TNFα, IL-1) cytokines.
Methods: 18 patients with RA diagnosis were included in the 30-week
study. The average age of patients was 46.0±8.4 y, disease duration 13.2
±5.3 y. 83.3% of patients were seropositive for rheumatoid factor, 66.8%
were ACCP-positive. Each patient was treated with methotrexate (MT)
12.5-20 mg/week. IF was administered at the dose of 3 mg/kg, according
to the common scheme. Patients were examined at week 0 (before the
inclusion), week 14, and week 30 after beginning of IF therapy.
Results: All patients had DAS28-CRP(4)>5.6. ESR and CRP have de-
creased by the 30th week. The average VAS score at week 0 was 68.3
mm, at week 30 - 26.0 mm. There were 50% of patients with good
response to IF therapy, 33.3% with moderate one, and 16.7% without
significant effect. Serum concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(TNFα, IL-1) at week 30 were substantially decreased compared to initial
levels along with trend of RF, ESR and CRP normalization as well as
improvement of clinical manifestations (Table).
Table. Dynamics of clinical and laboratory markers in combination ther-
apy (Me)
Indicator
0 week
14 week
30 week
RF, IU/l
45295 [12830;
134920]
25375 [7080;
80350]
9920 [5600;
110230]
ESR, mm/h
37 [4; 40]
10.5 [3; 51]
10 [2; 30]
CRP, mg/l
20.8 [4.6; 194.8]
2.65 [0.4; 33.4]
5.2 [1.1; 9]
DAS28-CRP(4)
5.63 [4.38; 6.24]
4.5 [2.5; 6.76]
3.58 [2.25; 4.91]
TNFα, pg/ml
6.92 [3.46; 11.03]
–
2.09 [1.74; 4.06]
IL-1, pg/ml
8.18 [4.64; 10.12]
–
3.25 [2.1; 6.45]
Conclusion: Tight correlation between shifts of TNFα, IL-1 levels with
common clinical and laboratory markers of RA activity against the back-
ground of combined IF-MT treatment enables us to use these innovational
biomarkers for RA treatment monitoring.
P545
RISK OF FRACTURE IN GLUCOCORTICOID REQUIRING
DISEASES: AN ANALYSIS ON A NATIONWIDE DATABASE
G. Adami1, A. Fassio1, E. Bertoldo1, O. Viapiana1, D. Gatti1, M. Rossini1
1Rheumatology Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Objective: Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GIOP) is the most
common form of secondary osteoporosis. Glucocorticoids (GCs) are pre-
scribed to patients affected by inflammatory diseases that are themselves
independent risk factors for osteoporosis. The aim of the present study
was to determine the risk of fracture associated with chronic GC use and a
variety GC requiring diseases.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective cohort analysis of a nationwide
cohort (DeFRACalc79 database). DeFRACalc79 is an algorithm for the
estimation of the fracture risk that considers many risk factors, including
glucocorticoid use. We used multivariable regression analysis adjusting
for several risk factors for fracture and GC intake to estimate the inde-
pendent role of glucocorticoid requiring illnesses on fracture risk.
Results: We found that GCs, at doses ≥5 mg/d for >3 months, were
associated with a 60% increased risk of vertebral or hip fractures (aOR
1.58, 95%CI 1.43-1.76) and with a 30% increased risk of fragility frac-
tures of any kind (aOR 1.32, 95%CI 1.20-1.45). We found that patients
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), connective tissue diseases (CTDs), chron-
ic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and neurological diseases (ND)
were at greater risk of vertebral or hip fracture (crude ORs 1.31, 1.20, 1.92
and 2.97 respectively). After adjusting for potential confounders (i.e.,
GCs, age, BMD levels, menopause and familiar history of fractures)
COPD and ND remained significantly associated with an increased risk
of vertebral or hip fractures (aORs 1.33, 95%CI 1.18-1.49 and 2.43,
95%CI 2.17-2.74). RA, COPD, IBD and ND also significantly increased
the risk of non-vertebral, non-hip fractures (aORs 1.23, 1.42, 1.52 and
1.94 respectively). Figure shows the risk of fracture in different diseases.
Conclusion: GC requiring diseases were independently associated with
an increased risk of fractures: COPD and ND with both vertebral and non-
vertebral fracture risk while RA and IBD were independently associated
only with non-vertebral, non-hip fractures.
Figure. Forest plot showing the risk of vertebral or hip fractures in differ-
ent diseases (panel A) and nonvert nonhip fractures (panel B). Upper
panel unadjusted analyses, lower panel adjusted analyses.
S283
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P546
PREVALENCE OF MUSCULOSKELETAL SYMPTOMS OF
COVID-19 AMONG HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS OF
THE UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL OF IBN ROCHD OF
CASABLANCA
H. El Moutaouakil1, K. Nassar1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Dept. of Rheumatology, Casablanca,
Morocco
Objective: Since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak in
March 2020, healthcare professionals were the first line of defense against
the new coronavirus. Subject to a significant risk of contamination,
healthcare workers still continue to serve the population. However, little
data are available on the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and its
various clinical features in this population. The aim of this study is to
assess the prevalence of osteo-articular manifestations among doctors and
nursing staff in the Ibn Rochd University Hospital of Casablanca.
Methods: Cross-sectional study conducted between October and
December 2020 using an anonymous selfadministered questionnaire, giv-
en to healthcare professionals working at the Ibn Rochd University
Hospital of Casablanca. Inclusion criteria: Only people who had been
contaminated by the COVID-19 virus were invited to answer the ques-
tionnaire. Epidemiological, clinical and evolutionary data were collected
and analyzed.
Results: Our study included 59 respondents. The mean age was 34.72
(±11.73) y, the sex ratio F/M was 3.7. The main comorbidities were in
order of frequency: obesity (16.9%), cardiometabolic syndrome, (11.9%),
lung disease (11.9%), degenerative rheumatism (10.16%), and chronic
inflammatory rheumatism (5.08%). 10.1% of respondents had toxic
habits. In terms of vaccination status, 11.8% were vaccinated against
influenza in the current year and 11.8% were vaccinated against pneumo-
coccus. 93.2% of respondents were symptomatic, and the common signs
were: fever (50.9%), cough (40.7%), flu syndrome (44.06%), anosmia
and ageusia (53.23%). The osteoarticular signs were mainly:
arthromyalgia (57.62%), back pain (72.9%), costalgia (11.8%) and
ostealgia (10.16%). The management of the COVID-19 disease was at
home in 86.4% of cases and in an intensive care unit in 6.7% of cases. All
the cases received azithromycin, vitamin C, zinc and vitamin D. 16.9% of
the cases received hydroxychloroquine, 40.7% of them needed thrombo-
prophylaxis, and corticosteroids were necessary in 3.4% of cases. The
outcome was favorable in all patients with an average healing time of
11.64 d (± 2.2), with the disappearance of general signs and OA signs in
71.2% of cases.
Conclusion: From the onset of symptoms and into the most severe stages
of COVID-19 disease, musculoskeletal symptoms are consistently pres-
ent in the majority of reported cases. However, the pathophysiology
explaining the involvement of the musculoskeletal system remains un-
known (1). In our study, COVID-19 disease was predominantly benign in
healthcare professionals, with regression of osteoarticular signs after
convalescence.
Reference: 1. Cipollaro L, et al. J Orthop Surg Res 2020;15:178.
P547
NEOPLASTIC HYPERCALCEMIA IN A RHEUMATOLOGY
DEPARTMENT: CASES REPORT
H. El Moutaouakil1, K. Nassar1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Dept. of Rheumatology, Casablanca,
Morocco
Objective: Malignancies are a common cause of hypercalcemia. About
20 to 30% of patients with tumor disease have had at least one episode of
hypercalcemia. Its occurrence during certain neoplasms is a factor of poor
prognosis, associated with significant mortality. The oncology and hema-
tology departments were for a long time the first interfaces with these
patients. The objective of our work is to discern the epidemiological and
etiological characteristics of neoplastic hypercalcemia in a rheumatology
department.
Methods: A descriptive study conducted at the rheumatology department
of the Ibn Rochd hospital university of Casablanca, over a period of 9 y,
between 2010 and 2019, including all patients in whom the diagnosis of
neoplastic hypercalcemia was retained. Epidemiological, clinical, biolog-
ical, radiological, etiological, and evolutionary data were collected and
analyzed.
Results: We have enrolled 6 patients; the mean age was 52 y (±14.32)
with extremes ranging from 32-68 y. The sex ratio was 1. The co-
morbidities of the patients were distributed as follows: hypertension in
1 case and chondrocalcinosis in 1 of the cases. All patients were symp-
tomatic, and all of them had general and musculoskeletal, and
neuropsychic, and digestive signs. The mean value of total serum calcium
was 118.16 mg/l (±18.64) and the mean value of corrected serum calcium
was on average 122 mg/l (±19.47), a hypercalciuria was noted in 1 pa-
tient, PTH level was normal in all patients, GFR <60 ml/mn was found in
1 patient. Serum protein electrophoresis showed a monoclonal peak in 2
patients and a polyclonal peak in 2 patients as well. On complete blood
count, 5 out of 6 patients had normochromic normocytic anemia, and half
had leukocytosis. Two patients had electrical disturbances on the electro-
cardiogram. An x-ray of the spine was requested in 2 patients, and have
shown osteolytic lesions in one patient, and a vertebral fracture above T6
in another patient, a skull x-ray was necessary in 2 patients and had
objectified geodic lesions and, a thoracic-abdominopelvic CT scan re-
vealed diffuse osteolytic lesions in 5 out of 6 patients with the presence
of a pulmonary process in 2 patients, a PET-Scan in 1 patient revealed
diffuse osteolytic lesions with a pulmonary process and hypermetabolic
mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The causes of hypercalcemia in this series
were secondary to hematologic malignancy in 2 cases, metastasis in 2
cases, and a combination of the two in 1 case.
Conclusion: Neoplastic hypercalcemia remains rare in rheumatology, its
etiologies are dominated by bone metastases. Management is now multi-
disciplinary and requires early diagnosis and effective treatment.
P548
THE PROFILE OF OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES IN OBESE
WOMEN
H. El Moutaouakil1, K. Nassar1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Dept. of Rheumatology, Casablanca,
Morocco
Objective: A low BMI has long been considered a classic risk factor for
the occurrence of fractures. However, contrary to what one might think, a
high mass index is absolutely not a protective factor according to the
latest publications, with the presence of some particularities depending
on gender. The aim of this study is to determine the different fracture
aspects in a population of obese women.
Methods: Descriptive retrospective study, conducted in the rheumatolo-
gy department of the Ibn Rochd hospital university over a total period of 5
y between 2015-2020, relating to obese patients in whom BMI ≥30 kg/m²
with an osteoporotic fracture. Any fracture that had occurred in women
with a BMI <30 kg/m² was excluded.
Results: Out of a total of 1200 files used, 120 obese women were iden-
tified, 16 of whom had a fracture. The average age was 68.31 y (±8.82).
The mean BMI was 34.17 kg/m² (±3.006), 68.7% had secondary osteo-
porosis (all causes), 12.5% had postmenopausal osteoporosis and 18.7%
had osteopenia. 8 patients had at least one vertebral fracture, 6 patients had
a wrist fracture, 1 patient had a leg fracture and one patient had an ankle
fracture. All occurring before the start of treatment with an average dura-
tion of 2.5 y. All patients received an antiosteoporosis treatment once
connected to the consultation, with an average duration of treatment of
36.4 months (±30.62), a densitometric gain was noted in 31.2% of the
patients. None of these patients fractured during treatment.
S284
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: It is now well established that a BMI threshold of around 25
kg/m2 provides a protective effect on the risk of fracture. Beyond this
threshold, the fracture incidence no longer varies, and obesity appears to
be more deleterious than protective. Despite the small number of our
series, our results match those of the literature, with an increased risk of
vertebral fractures and the occurrence of other atypical sites, particularly
leg and ankle.
P549
POOR TRABECULAR MICROARCHITECTURE AND 12-YEAR
FRACTURE RISK IN MEN: THE PROSPECTIVE STRAMBO
STUDY
P. Szulc1, D. Foesser1, R. Chapurlat1
1INSERM 1033, Lyon, France
Objective: Our prior study shows that poor trabecular microarchitecture
at distal radius predicts fractures in older men followed prospectively for
12 y. The aim of this study is to assess whether bone microarchitecture
predicts different types of fracture in similar models.
Methods: Among 825 men aged 60–87, 160 men had fragility fractures
over 12 y (spine 68, nonspine 103, major osteoporotic fractures [MOF]
61). Bone microarchitecture was assessed at distal radius and distal tibia
by HR-pQCT (Xtreme-CT Scanco). Femoral neck areal BMD (aBMD)
was measured by DXA (Hologic Discovery A).
Results: After adjustment for age, weight, femoral neck aBMD, prior
falls and fractures, low trabecular number (Tb.N) at distal radius was
associated with higher risk of MOF (HR=1.56 /SD decrease, 95%CI:
1.16–2.08, p<0.005). In a similar model, high trabecular separation stan-
dard deviation (Tb.1/N.SD, index of trabecular distribution heterogene-
ity) was associated with higher risk of MOF (HR=1.30 /SD, 95%CI:
1.14–1.48, p<0.001). Low Tb.N and high Tb.1/N.SD were also predictive
of nonspine fracture (HR=1.50 /SD decrease, 95%CI: 1.20–1.89,
p<0.001 and HR=1.23 per SD, 95%CI: 1.10–1.39, p<0.001). The most
discriminating threshold for distal radius Tb.N was 1.72/mm for MOF
(HR=2.23, 95%CI: 1.28–3.89, p<0.005) and 1.75/mm for nonspine frac-
tures (HR=1.89, 95%CI: 1.22–2.93, p<0.005). The most discriminating
threshold for Tb.1/N.SD was 233 μm for MOP (HR=1.98, 95%CI: 1.12–
3.49, p<0.05) and 205 μm for nonspine fracture (HR=2.12, 95%CI: 1.32–
3.38, p<0.005). Other HR-pQCT indices at distal radius and those at
distal tibia did not predict these fractures. HR-pQCT indices did not
predict vertebral fracture.
Conclusion: After adjustment for relevant confounders, low Tb.N and
high Tb.1/N.SD at distal radius were associated with higher risk of MOF
and nonspine fracture in older men followed prospectively for 12 y.
P550
MIRNA PROFILES IN EWING SARCOMA CANCER STEM
CELLS
S. Donati1, G. Palmini1, C. Aurilia1, C. Romagnoli1, F. Miglietta1, I.
Falsetti1, T. Iantomasi1, R. Zonefrati2, G. Galli1, A. Franchi3, G.
Beltrami4, D. A. Campanacci5, R. Capanna3, M. L. Brandi2
1Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, Florence, 2Fondazione Italiana Ricerca sulle Malattie dell’Osso
(FIRMO Onlus), Florence, 3Dept. of Translational Research and of New
Technologies in Medicine & Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, 4Ortopedia
Oncologica Pediatrica, AOU Careggi-AOU Meyer, Florence, 5SOD
Ortopedia Oncologica e Ricostruttiva, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy
Objective: Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) is a malignant mesenchymal-derived
tumour which usually arises in bone and rarely in soft tissues. In this study
we have evaluated the presence of EWS cancer stem cells (EWS-CSCs)
and we have investigated which is the miRNAs expression profile that
characterizes the established EWS-CSCs lines to find new molecular
diagnostic/prognostic factors for EWS.
Methods: The EWS samples have been collected at the Unit Ortopedia
Oncologica e Ricostruttiva, AOUC Careggi, Florence, with informed con-
sent approved by the local Ethical Committee. We have established pri-
mary EWS cell lines (ES) from each samples. Then we have isolated a
putative CSCs line from each one of the established ES lines. The CSCs
phenotype has been evaluated and confirmed by several cellular and mo-
lecular analyses and after that miRNAs expression levels of a panel of 15
miRNAs have been evaluated by specific TaqMan qRT-PCR assays.
Results: We have established five primary ES lines and we have isolated
the CSCs from each. The stemness of each isolated ES-CSCs lines was
evaluated inducing CSCs towards three different phenotypes, analysing
specific mesenchymal end embryonic stem cells marker genes and pro-
teins and evaluating their clonogenic capacity. We have also confirmed
the neoplastic capacity of these lines through invasion and migration
assays. Finally, we have analysed several miRNAs obtaining a prelimi-
nary miRNAs expression profile in ES-CSCs lines.
Conclusion: We have settled five new in vitro human models of ES-
CSCs. The preliminary results obtained about the analysis of the
miRNAs expression profile in these lines identifying a common
miRNA code, that could be used to develop new molecular therapies
against EWS and to find which miRNA could be represent novel EWS
biomarkers.
Acknowledgement: Supported by FIRMO Onlus.
P551
IN VITRO HUMAN HYPERTROPHIC CHONDROCYTES
MODELS AND RET INVOLVEMENT ON BONE FORMATION
AND ELONGATION
C. Aurilia1, G. Palmini1, C. Romagnoli1, S. Donati1, F. Miglietta1, G.
Galli1, D. A. Campanacci2, M. L. Brandi3
1Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences Mario Serio,
University of Florence, 2SOD Ortopedia Oncologica e Ricostruttiva,
AOU Careggi, University of Florence, 3Fondazione Italiana Ricerca sulle
Malattie dell’Osso, FIRMO Onlus, Florence, Italy
Objective: To investigate the possible role of RET in osteogenic differ-
entiation and mineralization process.
Methods: Growth plate (GP) lines were obtained by enzymatic digestion
and mechanical dispersion, and cultured in growth medium.
Characterization of GP lines as hypertrophic chondrocytes (HCs) was
evaluated through several cellular and molecular analysis. We have eval-
uated the expression of RET gene and protein in our established cell lines.
After that we have evaluate the role of RET in osteoblastogenesis treating
GP lines with RET ligands.
Results: GP finite cell lines were established and characterized as HCs.
The osteogenic differentiation assay has shown the capacity of the HCs
lines to differentiate into osteoblasts vs. the articular cartilage (AC) cell
line. All the HCs lines have showed a positive expression of RET gene
and the presence of RET protein vs. the AC line. Osteogenic differentia-
tion assay under treatment with RET ligands has reported that these are
both able to induce a rapid increase of alkaline phosphatase levels and an
early consequent mineralization process in vitro.
Conclusion: In this work we have established three primary cell lines of
HCs. For the first time we have evaluated and discovered the presence of
RET gene and protein in human in vitro established HCs models. On the
base of the scientific evidences about a possible role of RET in osteo-
blastogenesis we hypothesise that this could be involved also in the os-
teogenic differentiation of HCs and in the endochondral ossification pro-
cess also. Our obtained data on the role of RET in osteogenic differenti-
ation of HCs lines showed an effective involvement of RET in it.
Nowadays, we are evaluating the gene expression levels of osteogenesis
and of RET during mineralization process under treatment with RET
ligands, and we are starting to study the role of RET in chondrogenic
differentiation of established GP lines.
Acknowledgement: Supported by FIRMO Onlus.
S285
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: It is a retrospective study carried out on medical files of pa-
tients followed for knee osteoarthritis and who regularly consume
diclofenac continuously over a period of >3 y (2015-2018), we evaluated
the frequency of discontinuation diclofenac and its causes.
Results: We collected 107 cases, 90 women (84%) for 17 men (16%), the
mean age was 59.9 y (between 42-86 y), the mean BMI was 29.89 kg/m2,
concerning the different radiographic stages of knee osteoarthritis: 11%
were at stage 2 of Kellgren-Lawrence, 68% stage 3 and 22% at stage 4,
knee osteoarthritis was bilateral in 94%. The final discontinuation of
diclofenac affected 72/107 patients (67%), among the causes of discon-
tinuation: 16/72 had kidney problems (22%), 24/72 had digestive prob-
lems (33%) and 32/72 had cardiovascular pathologies (45%). There was a
significant relationship between the dosage of diclofenac and its perma-
nent discontinuation (p<0.002).
Conclusion: In our sample, the continuous consumption of diclofenac for
the treatment of knee osteoarthritis knows a definitively stopping in more
than 2/3 of cases, for renal, digestive or cardiovascular inconveniences,
this is all the more true if the daily dose diclofenac is important.
P554
HOW VERTEBRAL FRACTURES AFFECT BALANCE IN
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN?
D. Okutan Kuzu1, S. Tuzun1
1IUC-Cerrahpasa School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey
Objective: To evaluate the effect of previous vertebral fracture on bal-
ance and physical performance and its relationship with fall and fracture
risk in a population with postmenopausal osteoporosis.
Methods: 95 patients, at the age of 50 and above with postmenopausal
osteoporosis and/or osteoporotic vertebral fractures according to WHO
criteria were included in this study. Two groups with (n=45) and without
(n=50) vertebral fractures and two groups with single level (n=29) and
multiple level vertebral fractures (n=16) were statistically compared.
Detailed clinical history of the patients were collected, and demographic
data were recorded. The presence of vertebral fracture and kyphosis,
FRAX scores, DXA measurements, serum 25(OH)D values, Tandem
stance and gait test, Timed Up and Go test (TUG), Berg balance scale
(BBS) were performed. Stability index, fall index (FI) and Fourier fre-
quencies were also measured with computed static posturography.
Results: In the group with vertebral fractures, the probability of FRAX-
major osteoporotic fracture, lumbar total T-score with DXA and TUG
time were significantly higher and the BBS score was lower compared to
the group without vertebral fracture. Kyphotic posture was more promi-
nent in the group with vertebral fractures. The group with vertebral frac-
ture was found unsuccessful in Tandem stance and gait tests compared to
the group without vertebral fracture. The probability of FRAX-major
osteoporotic fractures was significantly higher in patients with multiple
level fractures compared to the patients with a single level fracture. There
was a strong positive correlation between the probability of FRAX-major
osteoporotic and FRAX-hip fracture in both groups. There was also a
moderately negative correlation between TUG and BBS, and between
the BBS and FI.
Conclusion: This study showed that the presence of vertebral fracture
had a negative impact on balance and physical performance leading an
increase in the probability of fracture and fall, in patients with postmen-
opausal osteoporosis. In this population, the probability of fracture and
fall parameters should be evaluated separately.
P555
ESTABLISHMENT AND CHARACTERIZATION OF A
CANCER STEM CELL LINE FROM CHONDROSARCOMA
I. Falsetti1, G. Palmini1, C. Aurilia1, S. Donati1, F. Miglietta1, T.
Iantomasi1, R. Zonefrati1, G. Galli1, A. Franchi2, R. Capanna2, M. L.
Brandi3
Objective: The key role of oxidative stress on bone health is well known.
While antioxidative vitamins are important for development and mainte-
nance of bone mass or bone formation, there are controversial findings in
this regard. The aim of the current systematic review is to critically assess
the meta-analyses of observational/ trials evaluating the influence of these
vitamins on bone health.
Methods: Relevant studies from Web of Science, PubMed, Scopus, and
Cochrane Library databases based on Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist until
May 2021 were searched. All meta-analyses that evaluated the effect of
antioxidative vitamins (A, C, E, K, B groups, and beta carotene) on bone
health were included. Meta-analyses of in vitro, animal or review studies
were excluded.
Results: Thirteen meta-analyses were included. Higher dietary intake of
retinol or total vitamin A slightly (5-6%) decreases total fracture risk, while
significantly increasing (29-40%) the risk of hip fracture. Blood retinol
levels of 1.99 to 2.31 umol/L are considered optimal for bone health.
Higher β-carotene intake significantly reduces (>20%) the risk of osteo-
porosis, hip and all types of fractures. Significant reduction of hip fracture
risk (50%) in absence of any effect on the risk of vertebral fracture was
reported with vitamin K1. Based on meta-analyses of trials, B vitamin
supplementation is not effective in preventing fracture or improving bone
turnover. Consumption of high doses of vitamin C significantly reduces
the risk of osteoporosis and hip fracture. A 5% reduction in hip fracture
risk is reported per every 50 mg/d consumption of vit C. High intake of
vitamin E significantly reduces (44%) fracture risk. Higher levels of ho-
mocysteine and B12 are significantly associated with increased (4%).
Decreased (4%) risk of fracture was observed per μmol/L increase in
homocysteine or per 50 pmol/L increase in B12 concentrations.
Conclusion: Due to insufficient evidence, their routine supplementations
with antioxidative vitamins are not recommended as a fracture-preventative
factor. More well conducted observational/trials are required to confirm the
effects beside determining their effective doses on bone health.
P553
CAUSES OF PERMANENT DISCONTINUATION OF
D I C L O F E N A C I N T H E T R E A T M E N T O F K N E E
OSTEOARTHRITIS
B. Bengana1, S. Abdellaoui1, I. Kalouda1, A. Boukabous1, S. Lefkir -
Tafiani1
1Rheumatology Department, University Hospital of Benimessous,
Algiers, Algeria
Objective: Knee osteoarthritis is a disabling chronic degenerative rheuma-
tism responsible of chronic pains which require the regular consumption of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and whose side effects
are not negligible. Diclofenac remains the most prescribed and consumed
in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis but with an increased risk of cardio-
vascular events, particularly if it is consumed over a long period. Through
this work we will try to find out the frequency and causes of stopping
diclofenac permanently in real life after a long period of consumption.
P552
EFFECTS OF ANTIOXIDATIVE VITAMINS ON BONE
HEALTH: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF META-ANALYSIS
STUDIES
O. T. Tabatabaei-Malazy1, Pouria Khashayar2, Patricia Khashayar3,
B. L. Larijani4
1Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology &
Metabolism Population Sciences Institute, Tehran, Iran, 2Cardiovascular
Dept., College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, UK, 3Center for Microsystems Technology, Imec
and Ghent University, Gent, Belgium, 4Endocrinology and Metabolism
Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences
Institute, Tehran, Iran
S286
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Dept. of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, Florence, 2Dept. of Translational Research and of New
Technologies in Medicine & Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa,
3Fondazione Italiana Ricerca sulle Malattie dell’Osso (FIRMO Onlus),
Florence, Italy
Objective: Chondrosarcoma (COS) is a rare type of sarcoma which arises
in bones and joints, where transformed cells produce an excess of carti-
lage. In this study we have evaluated the presence of cancer stem cells
inside COS.
Methods: The human COS sample have been collected at the Unit
Ortopedia Oncologica e Ricostruttiva, AOUC Careggi, Florence, with
informed consent approved by the local Ethical Committee. First, we
have established primary COS cell line (COS). From which we have
isolated a putative subpopulation of CSCs by the sarcosphere assay1.
Their CSCs phenotype has been evaluated by inducing isolated CSCs
line towards osteogenic and adipogenic phenotypes, analysing specific
mesenchymal stem cells markers proteins, analysing the expression of
embryonic stem cells marker genes, evaluating their clonogenic capacity.
Results: We have established a primary COS line and its respective CSCs
line (COS-CSCs). The CSCs phenotype of the isolated line from the
primary COS line was confirmed by observing the capacity of COS-
CSCs into osteoblasts and into adipocytes, by showing the presence of
the mesenchymal and embryonic stem cells markers into the cell line and
by evaluating a good rate as clonogenic capacity.
Conclusion: We have established a primary cell culture of this rare bone
sarcoma. We have characterized and studied a COS-CSCs line at cellular
and molecular level. We are currently completing the characterization of
COS-CSCs line evaluating their migration/invasion capacity through cell
biology analyses and by evaluating the expression of the regulatory genes
of these processes. We are also starting the study of micro-RNAs to
identify the miRNA profile of COS-CSCs line that could be used to
develop new molecular therapies against COS.
Reference: 1. Palmini G, et al. J Vis Exp 2016;116:53884.
Acknowledgement: Supported by FIRM.O Onlus.
P556
LIPID EXCHANGE DISORDERS IN PATIENTS WITH
CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY JOINT DISEASES
L. N. Shilova1, S. S. Spitsina2
1Volgograd State Medical University, 2Federal State Budgetary
Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and Experimental
Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”; Volgograd State Medical University,
Volgograd, Russia
Objective: Investigation of relationship between lipid profile of patients
with rheumatoid (RA) and psoriatic (PsA) arthritis during methotrexate
(MT) treatment, and identification their associations with the main pre-
disposing factors.
Methods: We enrolled 15 patients with PsA and 20 with RA, treated with
MT from 10-20 mg for at least 6 months. The exclusion criterion was the
presence of a concomitant disease that could affect lipid metabolism.
Results: The age of PsA patients was 48.2±10.56 y, the history of the
articular syndrome was from 7 months to 5 y. All the patients had
DAS28-CRP(4) from 4.28 to 5.01. BMI was 31.03±4.4 kg/m2. The mean
total cholesterol (TC) value was 6.04±1.55 mmol/L, and an increase of
the TC levels was found in 80% of cases. Changes in TG, LDL-C and
HDL-C were nonsignificant. The values of apolipoproteins A1 and B did
not go beyond the reference range (apoB - 1.32 g/L, apoA1 - 1.59 g/L).
Correlation analysis showed a positive TC relationship with age, over-
weight, and PsA duration. The age of RA patients was 53.8±9.4 years,
and disease history of 4.8±3.0 y. All the patients had DAS28-CRP(4)
≥7.06, and 80% of them were RF positive. BMI was 28.3 kg/m2. An
increase TC level was revealed in 80% of cases. Mean TC value was
5.63±1.6 mmol/L. An increased level of TG was found in 40% of cases,
LDL-C in 80%, and decrease of HDL-C in 60%. Mean HDL-C concen-
tration was 1.09±0.2 mmol/L, and mean LDL-C was 3.74±1.16 mmol/L.
The majority of patients had type II hyperlipidemia with a high degree of
atherogenicity: IIa - 12 people, IIb - 8 people. Correlation analysis re-
vealed direct TC relationships with age, menopause, and overweight. The
duration of RA was directly correlated with TC (r=0.189), LDL-C
(r=0.159). CRP level negatively correlated with HDL-C (r=-0.169).
Conclusion: TC increase was the most pronounced shift in lipid biomark-
ers. Lipid profile indicators are interrelated with traditional and disease-
associated factors.
P557
LONG-TERM OUTCOME OF A PATIENT WITH SEVERE
FACTOR VIII DEFICIT A FTER THREE JOINTS
REPLACEMENT SURGERIES: A CASE REPORT
E. Nikolikj Dimitrova1, V. Koevska1, B. Mitrevska1, C. Gjerakaroska
Savevska1, M. Gocevska1, M. Manoleva1, B. Kalchovska Ivanovska1
1University Clinic of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University Ss
Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia
Objective: People with severe deficit of factor VIII may develop
haemophilic arthropathy due to recurrent joint bleeding. It leads to per-
manent deformities, limited range of motion, muscle wasting, misalign-
ment, loss of mobility, and extremities of unequal lengths. They may also
develop degenerative osteoarthritis of the hips. Total joint replacement is
often used to improve the quality of life of these patients. The postoper-
ative rehabilitation is crucial for better outcome of these patients. The
purpose of this article is to present postoperative rehabilitation treatment
of a patient with severe haemophilia A and functional outcome after three
joint replacement surgeries on the lower extremities with five years fol-
low-up.
Case report: A patient, at the age of 48 at follow-up, with severe
haemophilia A, hip replacement surgery with total hip prosthesis on his
both hips, and total knee replacement surgery on the right knee were
undertaken. Prophylaxis was done with concentrate of human coagula-
tion factor VIII. The patient also received physical therapy treatment
before surgery to reduce pain and disability, as well as he performed
postoperative rehabilitation after all surgical treatments. The postopera-
tive rehabilitation treatment programs consisted of exercise therapy, oc-
cupational therapy, physical therapy modalities and education. Patient
assessment was made with Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) for pain, clinical
findings, Harris Hip Score and Functional Independence Score in
Haemophilia (FISH) for disability. At follow-up assessment 5 y after
the last operative treatment, the patient was subjectively and functionally
significantly better than before the surgery treatments. He still has mod-
erate pain in both ankles and the right shoulder periodically (NRS 3).
Harris Hip Score was 82.8 points, which means good results and FISH
score was 16 points. His gait on shorter distance was without a cane, and
for longer distance with a cane.
Conclusion: People with severe hemophilia A may have successful func-
tional outcome after multiple joint replacement surgeries. These results
may remain during the next few years. The close collaboration between
all team members are very important for achieving good results.
P558
CAN INTRANASAL CORTICOSTEROIDS INDUCE
OSTEOPOROSIS?
M.-R. Mitroi1, S.-A. Preda2, D.-M. Albulescu3, M.-J. uculina4, A.
Căpitănescu1, G. Mitroi5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology,
2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Anatomy,
4University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
S287
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Medicine, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Urology,
Craiova, Romania
Objective: Glucocorticoids remain a cornerstone of guideline-based
management of persistent asthma and allergic rhinosinusitis [1-4].
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GIO) is the most common iatro-
genic cause of secondary osteoporosis and an issue of concern for physi-
cians treating patients with inhaled or oral glucocorticoids either contin-
uously or intermittently. The aim of this study is to investigate the BMD
in a group of patients with allergic rhinosinusitis.
Methods: 13 adult patients with a diagnosis of allergic rhinosinusitis and
a history of at least 20 years of intranasal corticosteroids treatment were
included in this study. Nasal endoscopy, skin prick tests, and nasal cytol-
ogy were evaluated in all subjects. The BMD of the patients was mea-
sured by DXA.
Results: According to the T-scores, 4 patients were measured to have <-
2.5 SD T-score, considered as osteoporosis.
Conclusion: This study shows that prolonged intranasal corticosteroids
treatment in patients with allergic rhinosinusitis may induce osteoporosis
[5-11].
References:
1.
Mitroi M, et al. Mol Med Rep 2019;19:2792
2.
Mitroi M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:1051
3.
Ene CG, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:2108
4.
Calina D, et al. J Clin Med 2020;9:2395
5.
Constantin, C et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:2401
6.
Enescu AS, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:145
7.
Harza M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:123
8.
Mitroi G, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:1319
9.
Andronesi AG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2016;57:1125
10.
Rusescu A, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:642
11.
Salan AI, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2018;59:839
P559
MONITORING BISPHOSPHONATE TREATMENT IN
PRIMARY CARE: PINP AND OSTEOPOROSIS IN SHEFFIELD
EVALUATION (POSE STUDY)
L. Mattia1, C. Mark-Wagstaff1, B. Abrahamsen2, S. Davis1, N. Peel3, R.
Eastell1, M. Schini1
1University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, 2University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 3Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, Sheffield,
UK
Objective: To evaluate whether Sheffield PINP monitoring algorithm (1)
is associated with better treatment persistence, BMD increase, reduced
fracture risk and is cost-effective compared to standard care.
Methods: Inclusion criteria were referral from Sheffield GPs, BMD scans
performed between 2012-2013 and report advising initiation of oral bis-
phosphonate and monitoring. 906 patients were recruited and retrospec-
tively divided into Group A (intention to monitor, with baseline PINP,
n=588) and Group B (no intention to monitor, without baseline PINP,
n=318). The model described by Davis et al (2) was used to extrapolate
life-time costs and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs).
Results: No differences were found in baseline characteristics between
groups (age, gender, BMI, BMD and major risk factors for fractures).
More patients in Group A started oral treatment (77.4% vs. 49.1%;
p<0.001), but there were no differences in the presence of gap in treat-
ment >3 months and in treatment duration. More patients in Group A had
follow-up DXA scan at 4-6 y from baseline (46.9% vs. 29.2%; p<0.000)
and higher change of total hip BMD (+2.74% vs. +0.42%; p=0.003).
Fewer new fractures occurred in Group A but this was not statistically
significant. Patients in Group A were more likely to change management
(p=0.005) including switching to zoledronate (p=0.03). The increased
prescribing in Group A resulted in increases in both costs (£30.19) and
QALYs (0.0039) relative to the no intention to monitor strategy, giving
an incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) of £7,660 in the probabi-
listic sensitivity analysis.
Conclusion: Patients monitored with PINP are more likely to start oral
treatment, switch to zoledronate, have follow-up DXA scans and a greater
increase of hip BMD. PINP monitoring has the potential to be cost-
effective in a UK NHS setting given that interventions with an ICER
under £20,000 are generally considered to be cost-effective in a UK
context (3).
References:
1. Eastell R, et al. EJE 2018
2. Davis S, et al. Health Technol Assess 2020
3. Guide to the methods of technology appraisal 2013. NICE, London
UK. 2013
Acknowledgment: The project was funded by Roche Diagnostics
P560
LATIN AMERICAN CONSENSUS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF
GLUCOCORTICOID INDUCED OSTEOPOROSIS: A
PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION
O. D. M. Messina1, P. E. C. Clark2, L. M. S. Mendez Sanchez3, M. L. P.
Peralta4, S. Cerdas5, C. Campusano6, L. F. Vidal Neira7, M. L. Lazaretti
Castro8, J. Morales Torres9, N. C. Harvey10, J.-Y. Reginster11, C. F.
Zerbini12
1IRO, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Head Clinical Epidemiology Unit,
Hospital Infantil Federico Gomez Faculty of Medicine UNAM,
Mexico, Mexico, 3Epidemiology Unit Hospital Infantil Federico
Gomez, Mexico, Mexico, 4Epidemiology Unit, Mexico, Mexico,
5Endocrinology Unit, Sas José, Costa Rica, 6Clinica Universidad de
Los Andes, Santiago de Chile, Chile, 7CEDOR, Lima, Peru,
8UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 9Hospital Aranda de la Parra,
Guanajuato, Mexico, 10Epidemmiology Unit, Southampton, UK,
11Division of Public Health, Epidemiology Unit, Liege, Belgium,
12CEPIC, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Glucocorticoid (GC) induced osteoporosis (GCIOP) is the most frequent
form of secondary osteoporosis in clinical daily practice. GC therapy is
frequently indicated to treat autoimmune and chronic inflammatory dis-
eases. Two of the most devastating untoward effects are bone loss and
fractures. Doses as low as 2.5 mg of prednisone for more than 3 months
can impair bone integrity. Population at risk is defined based on the dose
and duration of GC therapy and should be stratified according to FRAX,
major osteoporotic fracture, prior fracture and bone density values
(BMD). General measures include to prescribe the lowest dose of GC
to control the underlying disease for the shortest possible time, maintain
adequate Vitamin D levels and calcium intake, maintain mobility and
prescribe a bone acting agent in patients at high risk of fracture. These
agents include oral and IV bisphosphonates, denosumab and teriparatide.
The aim of this consensus is to update the management of GCIOP ac-
cording to the reality of clinical practice in Latin American countries.
Methods: To develop this position paper a multidisciplinary panel of
experts including methodologists and key experts in the use of chronic
glucocorticoids including a patient or patient advocate, will define the
scope of the consensus; this will follow with a systematic literature search
to find all relevant papers including guidelines and systematic reviews. A
set of consensus statements will be derived from the literature review
including the grading recommendation and an adaptation to the local
context in Latin America when needed.
A questionnaire with a list of statements will be send by mail to a larger
group of physicians of diverse specialties known to prescribe
S288
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
glucocorticoids (rheumatologists, endocrinologists, primary care physi-
cians, dermatologists among others) for a Delphi process aggregating and
anonymizing feedback.
Responses to the statements will be collected and analyzed, items may be
dropped or added for subsequent rounds. Cronbach´s α will be use as
measure of internal consistency and the inter-rater agreement between
participants in each round will be evaluated using intraclass correlation
coefficient with 95% confidence intervals. Manuscript will be drafted and
will be available for comments to all members of the group before sub-
mission and publication.
P561
PRIMARY DISABILITY DUE TO MUSCULOSKELETAL
DISEASES IN THE IRKUTSK REGION (EAST SIBERIA,
RUSSIAN FEDERATION)
I. L. Petrun’ko1, L. V. Men’shikova2, N. V. Sergeeva1
1"Head bureau of medical-social expertise in Irkutsk region" of Ministry
of Labour and Social Development of RF, 2Irkutsk State Medical
Academy of Postgraduate Education – Branch Campus of the Federal
State Budgetary Educational Institution of Further Professional
Education “Russian Medical Academy of Continuing Professional
Education”, Irkutsk, Russia
Objective: Patients with diseases of the musculoskeletal system and con-
nective tissue have an increased prevalence and disability. This study
aimed to examine primary disability due to musculoskeletal diseases in
the Irkutsk region (East Siberia, Russian Federation) in 2010-2020.
Methods: The method of solid data base for persons recognized as dis-
abled for the first time for 2010-2020 in Irkutsk region due to musculo-
skeletal diseases. Level calculated at 10.000 of the adult population,
structure - in percentage.
Results: Primary disability due musculoskeletal diseases in the Irkutsk
region is higher than in the Russian Federation. There is a decrease of
percent of primary disability from 11.7% in 2010 to 6.0% (2018), 6.1%
(2019) and to 7.6% (2020) and in its level in adults from 10.4 in 2010 to
5.9 in 2015 and to 4.4 to 10 thousand of population. The first place
(45.5% - 40.5%) in the structure of primary disability in adults takes
osteoarthritis, in the working-age population - dorsopathies (45.9% -
29.1% in 2020). In the persons of retirement age osteoarthritis takes the
first place (from 75.1% to 61.3%). In the working-age population it oc-
cupies the second place (from 31.6% - 38.2% to 29.1% in 2020). In the
third place, as in people of working age, and at retirement age, is rheu-
matoid arthritis (10-12%).
Conclusion: The level of primary disability is higher in urban residents
and women. Reducing the level of disability due musculoskeletal diseases
was reached by both the greater availability of high quality and high tech
medical care for patients (operative treatment, early mobilization and
rehabilitation), as well as changes in regulatory documents on disability
criteria.
P562
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENT OF LEFT HEART
FUNCTION IN PATIENTS WITH RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
S. S. Spitsina1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and
Experimental Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”; Volgograd State Medical
University, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: Assessment of the essential echocardiographic parameters of
left heart chambers in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Methods: Patients with RA and symptoms arised at least 3 months before
were included in the study. The exclusion criteria were presence of symp-
tomatic coronary heart disease, arterial hypertension, or diabetes mellitus.
Results: All the included persons (n=24) were women. Their age was
49.6±7.9 y, and disease duration was from 0.5-12.0 y. DAS28-CRP(4)
index was 5.0±0.6. All the patients were treated with basic antirheumatic
drugs as well as NSAIDs therapy; in 25% of cases glucocorticoids were
also applied. Weight excess according to their BMI was found in 16.7%
of patients, but neither high blood glucose concentrations nor low GFR
were revealed. Mean total cholesterol was 5.59±0.92 mmol/l. No low
ejection fractions were registered in patients studied. Mean interventric-
ular septum (IVS) thickness was 8.9±1.0 mm whereas 25.0% patients had
high IVS thickness (>10 mm). Mean left ventricle (LV) myocardial mass
index was 90.42±23.85 g/m2, with patients had its mild (25.0%), moder-
ate (8.3%) or pronounced (8.3%) increase. Mean LV posterior wall thick-
ness was 0.92±0.12 cm, and 41.6% patients had it 11 mm or more. Mild
LV diastolic dysfunction was also revealed in all the cases (decreased
mean average E/A ratio, 0.87±0.24). In 92% of individuals, Grade 1
mitral or tricuspid regurgitation have been found in 92% patients, 8.3%
had grade 2 tricuspid regurgitation, and 42% ultrasound manifestations of
aortic atherosclerosis.
Conclusion: There are certain morphological and functional changes of
heart in RA even in absence of arterial hypertension, or any other primary
heart disease. Most common type of echocardiographic changes includes
concentric LV hypertrophy with diastolic dysfunction, mild valvular dys-
function without ventricle dilation, and aortic atherosclerosis.
P563
TUMOR-INDUCED OSTEOMALACIA: DIAGNOSTIC AND
REHABILITATION CHALLENGES
Z. Abilov1, A. Zhukov1, A. Povaliaeva1, E. Pigarova1, L. Rozhinskaya1,
K. Slashuk1, G. Melnichenko1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO) is a rare paraneoplastic
syndrome, which is characterized by renal phosphate wasting and disor-
dered bone mineralization. Due to a non-specific symptoms, small size
and slow growth of the tumor, it can take far more than several years to
make a correct diagnosis since the appearance of the first symptoms,
which may lead to irreversible consequences despite successful treatment.
We present a case of the patient with TIO and secondary hyperparathy-
roidism (SHPT) caused by hungry bone syndrome.Case report: A 65-y
woman had 12-y history of severe lower back pain, decrease in height by
16 cm during life, multiple atraumatic fractures of the ribs and pelvic
bones. The patient moved around using a wheelchair, but initiation of
therapy with alfacalcidol 3 mсg/d, cholecalciferol 15 000 IU/week, cal-
cium 1000 mg/d in 2014 improved her condition and she began to move
independently. However pain syndrome is contained exclusively by nar-
cotic analgesics (tramadol 200 mg/d). Tumor was localized in 2018 using
somatostatin receptor scintigraphy with 99mTc-Tektrotyd in the left in-
guinal region, which was resected (pathology - mesenchymal tumor,
FGF23+). After tumor removal SHPT was observed during 2 following
years despite medical treatment with alfacalcidol 3 mcg, cholecalciferol
15000 IU/week and calcium 2000 mg/d, which corresponded to hungry
bone syndrome. Normalization of SHRT was achieved only after 2 y of
treatment. The BMD increase was significant and continued throughout
the 3 years after surgery: +127.7% at hip, +23.4% - lumbar spine, +3.2% -
radius. Despite the normalization of the biochemical parameters and in-
crease in BMD, patient’s quality of life continues to be significantly
reduced. The patient has to use cane and walk for short distances because
of multiple bone fractures and severe pain syndrome.Conclusion: Our
clinical case illustrates that despite the successful results of surgical re-
moval of the tumor, a long course of rehabilitation may be required.
Severe pain syndrome due to multiple fractures, hungry bone syndrome
and secondary hyperparathyroidism is a challenge in the treatment of
these patients. Early diagnosis and initiation of the therapy can reduce
the number of complications and improve quality of life parameters.
S289
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P564
ASSESSMENT OF PAIN SYNDROME IN PATIENTS WITH
SPONDYLOARTHRITIC PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS
S. S. Spitsina1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and
Experimental Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”; Volgograd State Medical
University, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: To assess the severity of pain and quality of life in patients
with spondyloarthritic psoriatic arthritis (PsA), as well as the effective-
ness of therapy with methotrexate (MT).
Methods: We examined 15 patients with PsA receiving MT (at a dose of
10-20 mg/week) as a basic therapy for at least 6 months. DAS28-CRP(4),
DAPSA, the visual analogue scale (VAS), Likert scale were used. The
quality of life was assessed using the BASDAI, SF-36, HAQ-DI, DLQI,
QIDS SR-16. Skin manifestations of psoriasis was assessed by the PASI
index, BSA.
Results: Among patients there were 12 men, 3 women. The age of
the patients was 48.2±10.56 y, the duration of the articular syn-
drome was from 7 months to 5 y, the duration of the skin syn-
drome was from 1.5-22 y. All patients had DAS28-CRP(4) from
4.28-5.01; DAPSA from 23-26.8. The activity of the disease ac-
cording to the VAS by the patient was 61±8.9 mm, by the doctor -
58±4.2 mm, according to the Likert scale - 2.5 points. The pres-
ence of pain and functional limitations negatively affected all pa-
rameters of quality of life. Physical (41.64±10.9) and mental
(39.22±9.2) indicators changed according to SF-36. HAQ-DI
values ranged from 0.50-1.25, BASDAI - from 3.4 to 5.6, DLQI
- from 7 to 12, QIDS SR-16 - from 5 to 10. PASI, as an indicator
of the severity and severity of psoriasis, ranged from 4-13.6 points,
the BSA index in assessing the prevalence of skin manifestations -
from 2 to 9.8%.
Conclusion: All patients with spondyloarthritic PsA did not achieve re-
mission or low activity while taking MT as a DMARD. In 100% of
patients, despite long-term use of MT in a stable dosage, moderate clinical
and laboratory activity of the disease remained, which affected all indi-
cators of quality of life (both physical and mental, including manifesta-
tions of mild depression).
P565
VITAMIN D STATUS AMONG RESIDENTS OF DIFFERENT
REGIONS OF RUSSIAN FEDERATION
D. Marmalyuk1, G. Runova1, M. Saliba1, N. Bulanov1, V. Fadeyev1
1Sechenov University, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To study the vitamin D status depending on age, season and
geographical regions of Russian Federation.
Methods: In this retrospective study we analyzed 115,694 anonymised
blood samples from “In vitro” commercial laboratory database. The sam-
ples were collected from 2012-2017 in the central, northwestern and
southern regions of Russian Federation. Serum levels of vitamin D
(25(OH)D) were measured using chemiluminescent assay. The partici-
pants over the age of 16 were included in this study.
Results: The median age was 45 [33; 58] y. 25(OH)D median value
was 23.9 [17.0; 31.6] ng/ml. It was found that from 2012-2017,
69.5% of all samples had levels of 25(OH)D <30 ng/ml. There
was no significant difference between prevalence of vitamin D de-
ficiency (<20 ng/ml) in 2012 and 2017 (33.5% vs. 35%, p=0.188).
The difference between number of samples with 25(OH)D <20
ng/ml in winter and summer was significant (35% vs. 30%,
p=0.06). There was no evidence that number of participants with
25(OH)D in normal range (30-60 ng/ml) was different in various
residential areas: central region 28.4%, northwestern region 30.1%
and southern region 21.8% (p>0.05). However, severe deficiency
(<10 ng/ml) was statistically higher in northwestern region
(p<0.05). The analysis of different age groups had shown that
25(OH)D deficiency and severe deficiency were higher in group
<20 y (42% and 7.7%) as compared with 20-29 y (31.5% and
3.9%) and 40-59 y (32% and 5.3%), p=0.000 for all. Moreover,
only 22.6% in group <20 y was in normal range, what was compa-
rable with group >80 y (18.1%), p=0.1.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that vitamin D deficiency is widespread in
Russian Federation. No differences in vitamin D status has been observed
in various regions. Lower prevalence of 25(OH)D <20 ng/ml in summer
was discovered. The lowest level of vitamin D was observed in groups
<20 and >80 y.
P566
PATIENTS FUNCTIONALLY CAPACI TY AFTER
OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES
C. Mazeda1, S. P. Silva1, P. Vilas-Boas1, B. Figueiredo1, A. Barcelos1
1Centro Hospitalar Baixo Vouga, Aveiro, Portugal
Objective: Osteoporotic fractures imposes a significant health care bur-
den globally with the medium and long-term functional consequences
being catastrophic. This study aimed to analyze the relationship between
type of fracture, co-morbidities and functional dependence.
Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study that involved patients
with a fragility fracture observed in a Fracture Liaison Service (FLS).
Sociodemographic, clinical data and patients’ outcomes, after 12 months,
were collected. The data covered the period between 1 January 2019 to 31
December 2020 and was collected from the hospital database. A general
descriptive analysis was performed, p-value <0.05 was statistically
significant.
Results: A total of 187 patients were included (158 females, 29
males) averaging 76.98±11.99 years old. Most frequent comorbidi-
ties included hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, chronic
renal disease, thyroid pathology and depressive syndrome.
Osteoporosis risk factors, such as alcohol consumption and
corticotherapy, were also evaluated. The majority of fractures were
hip fractures (62.6%), followed by vertebral (15%), tibia (13.4%),
humerus (6.4%), and wrist (2.7%). In the prefracture period, most
patients were autonomous (58.8%) and only 12.3% were total func-
tionally dependent. After one year of follow-up, a general decrease
in autonomy was observed (43.3% were autonomous, 19.3% were
total functionally dependent, 5.9% died and 7.5% were lost for
follow-up). No statistically significant differences between the two
periods were found (p=0.704). In 22% of patients who were func-
tionally independent before the fracture (81 patients), they became
partially dependent for activities of daily living, after one year of
follow-up. The type of fracture is associated with alterations in
functionally dependence (p=0.015). No statistically relevant differ-
ences were found between different comorbidities (p<0.05). The use
of systemic corticotherapy were related to vertebral fracture
(p=0.02).
Conclusion: FLS has a fundamental roll to promote an early patients
recovery to the pre-fracture functionally capacity and counsel the patient
about the potential rehabilitative benefits.
S290
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P567
PHYSICAL THERAPY PROTOCOL FOR THE PREVENTION
OF METABOLIC BONE DISEASE OF PREMATURITY
L. C. Sousa1, J. Romano2, A. M. Ribeiro1, R. Amorim1, L. Palhau1
1Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, 2Unidade Local de Saúde de
Matosinhos, Porto, Portugal
Objective: Metabolic bone disease of prematurity (MBDP) is
characterised by reduced mineralization of the skeleton due to nutritional
and biomechanical factors. Physical inactivity due to lack of mechanical
stimuli and fetal movements against the uterine wall is a proposed con-
tributor. As such, physical therapy intervention has been proposed for
MBDP treatment. The aim of this paper is to review the published phys-
ical interventions in MBDP, in order to compile a protocol with defined
selection and follow-up criteria and an objective physical therapy
intervention.
Methods: A scientific review was performed using MEDLINE
(PubMed), COCHRANE Library and Physiotherapy Evidence Database
(PEDro). Clinical trials evaluating a physiotherapy intervention were se-
lected for protocol elaboration. Major outcomes considered included
growth and bone mineralization.
Results: Preterm infants with very to extremely low birth weight (<1500
g) are eligible. Other MBDP risk factors should be considered for
referenciation to PRM. Intervention begins between 1-2 weeks of life.
The proposed protocol consists of a tactile/kinesthetic stimulation - 6 soft
strokes per region, bilaterally (shoulder-to-wrist, along the chest wall, hip-
to-feet, occipital-facial-cervical and cervical-to-pelvis), in supine, for 15
min, followed by passive mobilization with soft articular compression
based on the intervention proposed by Moyer-Mileur et al.,1995 - 10 reps
of extension and flexion in each joint in a cephalocaudal direction for 15
min. Sessions are performed once a day for 30 min, 5-6 d/week, 30 min
after feeding. The intervention is maintained, at least, until the infant
reaches a weight of 2000 g or until discharge. Postdischarge follow-up
will include growth, neuromuscular maturity parameters and adverse
skeletal events (deformities, fractures).
Conclusion: MBDP’s clinical spectrum can range from asymptomatic to
a higher incidence of fragility fractures in the neonate. Long term conse-
quences are poorly defined. Rehabilitation programs have proven to
improve linear growth, daily weight gain and bone mineralization in the
short term. By describing and implementing this protocol we hope to
draw attention to PRM’s role in improving standard of care for premature
newborns.
P568
ASSESSMENT OF THE MAIN INDICATORS OF THE
HEMOSTASIS SYSTEM IN PATIENTS WITH RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS
K. V. Zhigulina1, S. S. Spitsina2
1City Clinical Emergency Hospital 25, 2Federal State Budgetary
Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and Experimental
Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”; Volgograd State Medical University,
Volgograd, Russia
Objective: To assess the main indicators of blood coagulogram in pa-
tients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), to determine their relationship with
the degree of activity, duration and systemic manifestations of the disease.
Methods: 100 patients with RA were examined. The state of the blood
coagulation system was determined according to the following indicators:
prothrombin index (PTI) according to Quick (%), fibrinogen (g/l), acti-
vated partial thromboplastin time (APTT, s), international normalized
ratio (INR).
Results: Among the surveyed there were 76% of women and 24% of
men. The average age of the patients was 53.7±12.25 y, the duration of
the disease was 6.13±3.69 y. Seropositive RA was detected in 63%. All
patients had moderate to high RA activity (32% and 68%). Pathology of
the cardiovascular system was detected in 84% of patients. More signif-
icant changes in the coagulogram were recorded in patients with systemic
manifestations and concomitant cardiac pathology compared with the
articular form: increased PTI (107.20±1.26% and 103.68±3.21%, respec-
tively) and fibrinogen (6.4±0.8 g/l and 5.1±0.76 g/l); decrease in INR
(0.83±0.06 and 0.96±0.14) and APTT (27.5±1.21 s and 34.1±2.4 s).
The same trend persisted in the group of patients with a disease duration
of >7 y. Correlation analysis between coagulogram parameters and dis-
ease activity showed a direct positive relationship between IPT and ESR
(r=+0.23), fibrinogen and ESR (r=+0.34), fibrinogen and CRP (r=+0.32).
Also, inverse correlations were obtained between INR and ESR (r=-0.24),
APTT and ESR (r=-0.22), APTT and CRP (r=-0.26).
Conclusion: In RA patients, an increase in PTI and fibrinogen level, a
decrease in INR, and a shortening of APTT were found, which indicates
activation of the blood coagulation system, hypercoagulation. The re-
vealed disorders correlate with RA activity, disease duration, presence
of systemic manifestations and concomitant cardiovascular pathology.
P569
CARBOHYDRATE IMBALANCE IN PATIENTS WITH GOUTY
ARTHRITIS
K. V. Zhigulina1, S. S. Spitsina2
1City Clinical Emergency Hospital 25, 2Federal State Budgetary
Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and Experimental
Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”; Volgograd State Medical University,
Volgograd, Russia
Objective: To study the incidence of carbohydrate metabolism disorders
in patients with gouty arthritis (GA).
Methods: The study included 40 patients with primary chronic GA, di-
agnosed on the basis of S. Walles criteria and with impaired carbohydrate
metabolism. Among the examined men prevailed (65%), the average age
of the patients was 52 y. A family history of gouty arthritis was observed
in 25 patients. The average duration of the disease was 8.2±3.5 y. All
patients underwent daily fasting measurements of blood sugar levels with
a glucometer, and a study of glycosylated hemoglobin was carried out.
S291
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: All patients were hospitalized in the rheumatology department.
The onset of GA was observed on average at 35.6±10.0 y. Tofus form
was diagnosed in 26 (65%) patients, 14 (35%) did not have tophus. The
average level of fasting blood glucose is 8.4±2.8 mmol/l. Type 2 diabetes
mellitus had 10 (25%) patients. In 25 (62.5%), impaired glucose tolerance
was noted. Impaired fasting glucose was observed in 5 (12.5%) patients.
The average level of glycosylated hemoglobin was 7.0±1.5%. At the time
of examination, 8 (20%) were receiving hypoglycemic therapy. In the
course of the study, complications of diabetes mellitus were identified.
Diabetic retinopathy was most often detected in 6 (15%) patients; ne-
phropathy at the stage of microalbuminuria was detected in 5 (12.5%)
patients.
Conclusion: The study revealed a fairly high prevalence of carbohydrate
metabolism disorders in patients with gouty arthritis. Careful monitoring
of both the course of gout and its inherent comorbid pathology is neces-
sary due to the numerous complications and concomitant disorders.
P570
DENOSUMAB IN MEN: 6 YEARS RETROSPECTIVE, REAL-
WORLD CLINICAL PRACTICE SINGLE CENTRE STUDY
(OSTEOPROM). OSTEOPOROSIS TREATMENT AND
FRACTURES DATA – PART 1
D. Pokšāne1, I. Rasa2
1Latvian Osteoporosis & Bone Metabolic Diseases Association; Rīga
Stradiņš University, 2Latvian Osteoporosis & Bone Metabolic Diseases
Association, Riga East Clinical University Hospital (RECUH), Rīga
Stradiņš University, Riga, Latvia
Objective: Osteoporosis represents a considerable threat to global health
and national healthcare systems. It is a disease that causes bones to be-
come weak and lose their strength, making them break more quickly than
normal bones. Globally 20–25% of fragility fractures occur in men. In the
coming decades' prevalence of osteoporotic fractures to increase due to
population ageing, e.g., hip fractures to rise more in men than in women;
men are twice as likely to die after a hip fracture. The treatment ap-
proaches to male osteoporosis are diverse. Osteoporosis in men is an
under-recognized and undertreated disease.
Methods: We analyzed the effectiveness of osteoporosis treatment in
men with denosumab (Dmab) from August 2014 to January 2021. We
studied BMD changes and fractures in the men retrospective cohorts in a
real-world clinical setting using patients (pts) data from single-centre
(OsteoProM). We collected and analyzed at the beginning and end of
the study: BMD changes of the spine L1/L4 and in some cases total spine,
right and left femoral neck by using DXA and 1 case by QCT; risk
factors; lab data (serum Ca, iPTH, vitamin D); comorbidities and con-
comitant medications. Men were divided into 6 groups according to the
number of Dmab injections (inj): group (grp) 1 (12–13 inj.), grp 2 (9–11
inj.), grp 3(8 inj.), grp 4 (6–7 inj.), grp 5 (4–5 inj.), grp 6 (1–3 inj.). This
grp was divided into 2 subgroups: 6A1 (BMD in spine L1/L4) and 6A2
(BMD in a total of the spine); grp 6B BMD made by QCT.
Results: Over the last 6 y, women with OP was 691 (89.2%) and men 84
(10.8%). We analyzed a total of 37 (44%) of 84 men who received Dmab.
Men an average age 63.2±10.4SD y. The average BMI (kg/m2) was 24.3
±3.7SD. BMD analyzed by DXA scans in 36 pts (97.3%) and QCT in 1 pt
(2.7%). Men with idiopathic osteoporosis were 83.8%, glucocorticoid-
induced osteoporosis 10.8%, secondary osteoporosis 5.4%. At the begin-
ning of the study, men with at least 1 fracture were 56.7% (62.0% in the
spine, 9.5% hip, 14.3% forearm, 28.6% ribs, 28.6% other types of frac-
tures). At the end of the study, men with at least 1 fracture were 2 (5.4%) –
grp 6A2 (left olecranon) and grp 2 (vL1). DXA was made for all pts at the
beginning of the study (n=37) and at the end of the study 43.2% (n=16).
The most significant BMD gain in the 1st grp 12.8% (n=2). Then in the
subgrp 6A2 – 9% (n=3); grp 2 (n=4), and grp 5 – 7.8% (n=2). The least
significant gain was in the grp 3 – 2.8% (n=2). In the grp 4 – 6.6% (n=4)
and in the subgrp 6A1 – 3.8% (n=2). Also, total right and left BMD was
analyzed (n=12); more significant gain was in grp 1st in the right hip –
4.7% and left hip – 5.9% (n=2). Lab data, data about co-morbidities and
concomitant medications will be presented later. During the study, no
cardiovascular events were detected.
Conclusion: Dmab is effective in increasing BMD at the lumbar spine
and the hip. The most significant BMD increased after 12–13 Dmab
injections. The study indicates that Dmab is effective and safe.
P571
EVALUATION OF DIABETES MELLITUS IN A COHORT OF
FRAIL OLDER ADULTS
S. Mc Gettigan1, A. Mohamed2, I. Pillay1, M. J. Brassill1
1Tipperary University Hospital, Clonmel, 2University Hospital Limerick,
Limerick, Ireland
Objective: To identify the prevalence of diabetes in a cohort of frail older
adults who attended Tipperary University Hospital (TUH) and explore
the relationship between frailty and diabetes in this group. Prognosis and
treatment of diabetes can vary greatly in the presence of frailty.
Methods: A multidisciplinary team provide liaison geriatric input to frail
older adults in TUH. This team carries out comprehensive geriatric as-
sessments (CGAs) on patients identified using a VIP tool or via inpatient
consults. These CGAs were accessed and reviewed regarding frailty
scores, history of falls, diabetes diagnosis, medications and diabetes com-
plications including hypoglycaemia.
Results: CGAs were reviewed for 213 patients from September to
November 2019. 58 patients had a diagnosis of diabetes (27.2%), and
all were type 2 diabetics. The median age was 84. The average Clinical
Frailty Scale score was 5.4 indicating mild to moderate frailty. Over two-
thirds of patients (n=137) were on >5 medications. 76 patients had a
history of falls, and 24 (31.5%) of those had diabetes. 21 patients were
prescribed either sulphonylureas and/or insulin. One patient had a
sulphonylurea stopped on admission following CGA. Five patients had
a documented history of hypoglycaemia, 2 of these patients were on
insulin and one was on a sulphonylurea. The median HbA1c was 49
mmo/mol. 15 patients had complications associated with diabetes, includ-
ing 3 with diabetic retinopathy and 6 with diabetic neuropathy. The me-
dian duration of diabetes was 9.5 y.
Conclusion: The management of frail older adults with type 2 diabetes is
complicated by multimorbidity and increased risk of adverse effects of
treatment such as hypoglycaemia. The assessment of frailty should be a
routine component of a diabetes review for all older adults, and then
glycaemic targets and medication choices should be adjusted accordingly.
P572
MAIN OSTEOSARCOPENIA RISK FACTORS IN STABLE
COPD PATIENTS
A. K. Suleymanova1, I. A. Baranova1
1The Russian National Research Medical University N.I. Pirogov,
Moscow, Russia
Objective: It is known that COPD is often combined with osteoporosis
and sarcopenia, which are often under-diagnosed. The aim of the study
was to analyze the main osteosarcopenia risk factors.
Methods: This cross-sectional study included 132 patients with stable
COPD (102 males/30 females, mean age 67.6±8.2 y). All patients were
assessed of symptoms and risk of exacerbations according to GOLD
consensus report (ABCD assessment). Sarcopenia and its severity were
diagnosed for all subjects according to the algorithm developed by the
EWGSOP2 criteria. The Appendicular Skeletal Muscle Mass and BMD
were estimated using DXA. Osteoporotic fractures were revealed by
X-ray or anamnesis. The vitamin D level was assessed by
S292
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
chemiluminescent immunoassay on microparticles according to interna-
tional standards. Key risk factors were evaluated using multiple logistic
regression analysis.
Results: Sarcopenia was diagnosed in 41.7% of COPD patients. A low
BMD (osteopenia or osteoporosis) was diagnosed in 84.8% of patients. A
combination of these two pathologies or osteosarcopenia was found in
38.6% of COPD patients (n=51). Moreover, 9.9% of patients had severe
osteosarcopenia characterized by osteoporotic fractures, severe muscle
weakness and atrophy. Osteosarcopenia was found at any "ABCD"
groups and severity airflow limitation. However, very severe airflow
limitation (OR=5.8 (95%CI 1.4-2.0, p=0.01)), use of systemic glucocor-
ticoids (OR=4.7 (95%CI 1.1-10.5, p=0.03)), low BMI (OR=1.3 (95%CI
1.1-1.3, p˂0.01)), group D by GOLD (OR=4.7 (95%CI 2.5-5.0, p=0.02)),
low blood vitamin D concentration (OR=10.5 (95%CI 1.1-83.3,
p=0.03))were the main osteosarcopenia risk factors.
Conclusion: Osteosarcopenia is a frequent pathology in COPD patients
(38.6%), almost one in ten patients has osteoporotic fractures. The COPD
clinical severity, the use of systemic glucocorticoids, low BMI and very
severe airflow limitation, as well as low blood vitamin D levels are the
main osteosarcopenia risk factors.
P573
DISCORDANCE IN DXA DERIVED T-SCORES AT THE HIP
AND SPINE IN OSTEOPOROSIS
F. Brennan1, A. McDonough1, N. Maher1, C. O'Carroll1, N. Fallon1, H.
McNulty2, M. Ward3, R. Lannon1, K. McCarroll1
1St James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 2University of Ulster, Belfast, UK,
3University of Ulster, Belfast, Northern Ireland
Objective: There is often significant discordance between T-scores of the
hip and spine and in some patients only one site can be measured. This
study aimed to identify the importance of site-specific T-scores in diag-
nosing osteoporosis.
Methods: We analysed data from participants of the Trinity, University
of Ulster and Dept. of Agriculture Study (TUDA) cohort who all had
BMD measurements of both the spine and hip and a diagnosis of osteo-
porosis using standard ISCD criteria.
Results: 746 participants were identified with a mean age of 71.7±7.3, of
whom 82.5% were female. Osteoporosis was identified in 82.8% in the
spine, in 53.4% in the hip and in 13.9% osteoporosis was identified on the
basis of only hip T-scores. The concordance rate for osteoporosis at the
spine and hip was 36.1%. In 70% of cases, T-scores were lower in the
neck of femur vs. total hip. Differences in site diagnosis was largely
between osteoporosis and osteopaenia though in 7.7% there was a mis-
match due to osteoporosis of spine and normal hip BMD. Hip osteopo-
rosis was independently predicted by male gender (p<0.001), older age
(P<0.001) and lower BMI (P<0.001).
Conclusion: In the vast majority, spine BMD inferred a DXA diagnosis
of osteoporosis. However, in one in eight, a diagnosis of osteoporosis was
based on only hip BMD. Multiple factors cause discordance including
greater bone loss in the spine due to menopause, drugs and other second-
ary causes. Greater spine BMD readings occur in osteoarthritis while
factors like BMI may impact the hip more. However, fragility fractures
at either site independent of T-score can also indicate osteoporosis.
P574
SARCOPENIA AND FRACTURES IN COPD PATIENTS
A. K. Suleymanova1, I. A. Baranova1
1The Russian National Research Medical University N.I. Pirogov,
Moscow, Russia
Objective: Sarcopenia is a progressive and generalized skeletal muscle
disorder that is associated with increased likelihood of adverse outcomes.
The aim of the study was to analyze the main predictors and conse-
quences (fracture development) of sarcopenia in COPD patients.
Methods: In the cross-sectional study 132 patients with stable COPD
(102 males/30 females, mean age 67.6±8.2 y) were included.
Sarcopenia and its severity were diagnosed according to the algorithm
of the EWGSOP2. Muscle mass was evaluated using DXA. Vertebral
fractures were diagnosed using semiquantitative morphometry in routine
DXA. The main key risk factors were evaluated in multiple logistic re-
gression analysis.
Results: Sarcopenia was diagnosed in 55 (41.7%) patients. 44 patients
(33.3%) had severe sarcopenia. Sarcopenia was registered at any groups
of COPD (the ABCD assessment tool). However, low FEV1 (OR=1.3
(95%CI 1.0-1.6, p˂0.001)), use of systemic glucocorticoids (OR=3.4
(95%CI 1.2-12.7, p=0.03)), low BMI (OR=1.3 (95%CI 1.2-1.4,
p˂0.001)), group D (OR=4.0 (95%CI 1.2-13.7, p=0.03) were the main
predictors of sarcopenia. Osteoporotic fractures were present in 35 pa-
tients (26.5%). Half of all patients with fractures (n=17) had asymptom-
atic vertebral fractures, which we first diagnosed using morphometric
analysis. Multiple fractures were in 18 patients (13.6%). Patients with
sarcopenia have osteoporotic fractures more often than patients without
sarcopenia (OR=2.8 (95%CI 1.3-6.2, p=0.02).
Conclusion: Sarcopenia is a frequent pathology in COPD patients and it
is associated with the severity of the underlying disease, the use of sys-
temic glucocorticoids, low BMI and airflow limitation. Sarcopenia sig-
nificantly increases the risk of osteoporotic fractures such as vertebral
fractures which may be without symptoms.
P575
EXPERIENCE WITH TERIPARATIDE AS TREATMENT OF
OSTEOPOROSIS IN THE MOSCOW REGION OF THE
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
K. A. Krasulina1, I. V. Kryukova1, A. V. Dreval1, E. Y. Polyakova1, I. A.
Barsukov1
1Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute (MONIKI), Moscow,
Russia
Objective: To evaluate the efficacy of teriparatide in patients with differ-
ent forms of osteoporosis in real clinical practice in the Moscow region of
the Russian Federation.
Methods: The study included 83 patients with osteoporosis: 1) primary
(42 postmenopausal women, 7 men >50 y), 2) glucocorticoid-induced (25
women, 4 men), 3) as a result of other causes (2 women, 3 men). The
average age was 65±13 (22-92) y. The diagnosis of osteoporosis was
made using densitometry (DXA, T-score is < -2.5SD in the lumbar spine
or hip) and/or a history of low-energy hip, vertebral or multiple fractures.
All patients were treated with teriparatide 20 μg/d. Treatment efficacy
was assessed by DXA after 12 and 24 months and the new reported
fractures. Procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide (P1NP) was tested
in 8 patients at baseline and after 3 months of therapy.
Results: Initially, patients had multiple (27 (32.53%)), vertebral (32
(38.55%)) and femoral (3 (3.61%)) fractures. A statistically significant
increase in P1NP level from 55.6±5.6 to 76.8±12.3 ng/ml (p=0.02) after 3
months was found in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis (n=7),
that reflected the early treatment effectiveness. One man with senile os-
teoporosis also showed a rise in P1NP from 49.3 to 61.8 ng/ml. After 2 y
of therapy, T-score and BMD increased from the initial -2.77±1.17SD
and 0.77±0.14 g/cm2 to -2.52±0.91SD and 0.82±0.1 g/cm2 (p<0.001,
n=70) respectively. Patients with postmenopausal osteoporosis without
type 2 diabetes mellitus (n=32) showed an increase in T-score in the spine
from -2.83±1.06SD to -2.58±1.24SD (p=0.014) and in the femoral neck
from -2.16±0.77SD to -1.88±0.84SD (p=0.046). In the glucocorticoid-
induced osteoporosis group, there was an improvement in T-score in the
spine (-2.18±0.87 vs. -2.77±1.09 (p=0.011)) and in the hip (-1.71±0.88
vs. -2.09±0.63), but not statistically significant (p=0.609). There were no
new cases of fractures and adverse events associated with the therapy.
S293
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: The use of teriparatide in patients with both primary and
secondary osteoporosis in real clinical practice in the Moscow region of
the Russian Federation has shown a significant increase in BMD without
new cases of fractures and it is characterized by acceptable tolerability
profile.
P576
EFFECTIVENESS AND SAFETY OF PHARMACOLOGICAL
A N D N ON P H A R MA C O L O G I C A L T HE RA P Y F OR
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: AN OVERVIEW OF REVIEWS
E. Sanchez-Vazquez1, L. Mendez-Sanchez1, P. Clark1, B. Araiza1, E.
Diaz1
1National Autonomus University of Mexico (Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México) and Hospital Infantil de Mexico Federico
Gómez, Clinical Epidemiology Research Unit, Mexico City, Mexico
Objective: Compare the efficacy and safety of DMARD synthetic and
biological as well as nonpharmacological therapies in patients with rheu-
matoid arthritis (RA).
Methods: Systematic reviews were included that met the selection
criteria: the efficacy outcomes studied were ACR, EULAR, and
DAS28. The overlap of the included primary studies was assessed, as
well as the risk of bias of the RS included using the ROBIS tool.
PROSPERO ID: 255892.
Results: This "Overview of Reviews" was prepared following the guide-
lines of the Cochrane manual 2019. 61 related systematic reviews were
included. An overlap of 0.61% (slight) was found. The overall risk as-
sessment indicated a 45% predominance for low risk of bias.
We found 61 comparisons of both pharmacological and
nonpharmacological interventions with measures of effect that reached
statistical significance. For biologic DMARDs, the intervention with
infliximab stood out among all those in the anti-TNF group for ACR20,
50, and 70 outcomes, with an OR efficacy (95%CI) of 6.93 (3.52-13.66)
for ACR50. For non-anti-TNF biologic DMARDs, the highest effect
measures were for tocilizumab OR 7.22 (4.52-11.53) for ACR70.
Methotrexate stands out for conventional DMARDs OR (95%CI) 4.54
(2.51-6.61) and tofacitinib RR 3.87 (2.44-6.668). For non-
pharmacological therapy, all of them report measures of effect statistically
significant for the DAS28 and ACR20 efficacy outcomes: For exercise,
the percentage of change DAS28 was 34.6% with p=0.01. For psycho-
logical therapy mindfulness, the mean difference DAS28 was -0.29 p<0.
00001, and for tripterygium supplementation RR 3.81 (1.79-8.09) for
ACR20.
Conclusion: Of all the notable comparisons, those with the greatest clin-
ical relevance are pharmacological interventions, and of these therapies
with biological DMARDs, especially anti-TNF since their comparisons
are against other DMARDs and not against placebo in the majority as
well as they own reporting the highest effect measures among all.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful for the support provided by the
Master's Degree and Ph.D. Degree in Medical, Dental and Health
Sciences Program of UNAM, as well as the support of CONACyT
Mexico.
P577
MULTIPLE BROWN TUMORS IN A PATIENT WITH
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM: A CASE REPORT
Z. Abilov1, E. Piskunova1, M. Demina1, E. Pigarova1, E. Mamedova1, K.
Slashuk1, Z. Belaya1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Brown tumors are rare focal giant-cell lesions caused by hyper-
parathyroidism. Due to the lack of clinical and radiological hallmarks the
diagnosis may be delayed. The differential diagnosis between brown
tumors and odontogenic cysts, bone metastasis and other similar conditions
may be challenging. We present a case of a 30-y.o. woman with multiple
brown tumors due to primary hyperparathyroidism.Case report: A year
ago, the patient started experiencing pain in the lower jaw, toothache,
edema and hyperemia at the area of 38, 42-45 teeth. This condition was
misdiagnosed as an odontogenic cyst and these teeth were extracted with-
out significant effect. CT of the skull revealed multiple tumors 20x30 mm
and 30x40 mm in the projection of 42-45 teeth. Histological sections
showed osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells, multiple hemorrhages
and deposits of hemosiderin. 18F-FDG PET/CT showed a metabolically
active tissue in the multiple solid areas of upper and lower jaw and
osteolytic lesions of sternum, shoulders, Th7, Th12, L1, L5 vertebras and
ribs. Labs revealed severe hypercalcemia (3.9 mmol/l), elevated PTH (1790
pg/ml) and AP (514 IU/I), low P (0.3 mmol/l), consistent with primary
hyperparathyroidism (PHPT). US confirmed a tumor in the upper right
parathyroid gland 20х18х13mm, nephrolithiasis. BMD Z-score was low
- L1-L4 -3.4, neck -3.1, total hip -2.6, radius 33% -4.3. Due to a high risk of
hypercalcemic crisis patient received denosumab 60 mg s.c. After parathy-
roidectomy the patient had a hypocalcemia due to hungry bone syndrome
and discharged on alfacalcidol 1 mсg/d, cholecalciferol 10000 IU/d, calci-
um 1000 mg/d, with subsequent cancellation alfacalcidol and increase of
calcium dose up to 3000 mg/d. After 1-y labs showed a normalization of
serum Ca (2.15 mmol/l), PTH (21.3 pg/ml), P (1.02 mmol/l) and high levels
of osteocalcin (55.18 ng/ml) and CTx (1.18 ng/ml), consistent with intense
bone remodeling. DXA showed a significant increase in BMD: +65.6% at
hip, +64.1% - lumbar spine, +32.3% - radius.Conclusion: Our clinical case
shows the consequences of untimely diagnosis of PHPT and rare combi-
nation of multiple brown tumors of fascial and other bones. Despite low
prevalence of PHPT with brown tumors, a systemic examination and care-
ful differential diagnosis is required.
P578
S P O R A D I C
R E C U R R E N T
P R I M A R Y
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM CAUSED BY MULTIPLE
ECTOPIC ADENOMAS
E. Mizeva1, A. Eremkina1, E. Bibik1, N. Mokrysheva1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is usually caused by
sporadic adenoma typically located posterior to the thyroid gland.
Multiple and/or ectopic adenomas are rare and present a severe challenge
in parathyroid surgery.
Methods: We present a clinical case of the patient with sporadic recurrent
PHPT with an unusual presentation of twice ectopic adenomas.
Results: A 49-year-old woman presented with dysmobility syndrome,
the pains in the large bones, joints, in the epigastric, seizures. The
PHPT complicated by severe hypercalcemia, osteoporosis with osteitis
fibrosa cystica and recurrent nephrolithiasis was first diagnosed in 2010.
The contrast-enhanced CT revealed an ectopic formation 25x19x25 mm
into the anterior mediastinum. The patient was managed with video
assisted thoracoscopic surgery, the histological examination confirmed
the typical adenoma. Normocalcemia was achieved combined with a
moderate PTH increase regarded as secondary hyperparathyroidism.
The PHPT recurrence had diagnosed since 2015, but 99mTc-MIBI scin-
tigraphy and CT remained negative. Due to the osteoporosis and hyper-
calcemia progression, conservative therapy was prescribed
(bisphosphonates followed by denosumab in combination with
cinacalcet). In 2019 CT and 99mTc-MIBI showed the formation
7x14x12 mm nearby the right ventricular pericardium. In 2020 a sternot-
omy with parathyroidectomy was performed followed by hypocalcemia
and PTH normalization. The histological characteristics corresponded to
adenoma from chief cells. 3 months later, the patient underwent a gradual
withdrawal of alfacalcidol and calcium supplements because of mild hy-
percalcemia, hypercalciuria and increased PTH, what evidenced the
S294
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
persistence of the disease. A scintigraphy with SPECT/CT revealed a
focus 4x3x6 mm in the same area without active accumulation.
Mutations in MEN1 and CDC73 genes were excluded.
Conclusion: The multiple parathyroid adenomas in ectopic locations in
the same patient are uncommon and lead to failure after the initial surgery.
They can be difficult to identify and require combined imaging modalities
and surgical approaches, that can improve the clinical decision making.
P579
A WORLDWIDE BIBLIOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF PUBLISHED
LITERATURE ON TRABECULAR BONE SCORE
H. Dehghanbanadaki1, H. Aazami2, S. Noorali1, H. Yarmohammadi1, A.
Ghasemzadeh3, M. Sanjari1, K. Khalaji1, M. J. Mansourzadeh1, A.
Ostovar1, N. Fahimfar1
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran,
2Metabolic Disorders Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 3Dept. of Medicine and Endocrinology, Austin
Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Objective: Trabecular bone score (TBS), as a texture indicator of bone
microarchitecture, predicts the risk of fracture from DXA, independently
of BMD. This study aims to explore the bibliometric profile of literature
published on TBS.
Methods: We searched Scopus for “trabecular bone score” or “trabecular
score” from the beginning to the end of 2020 and related documents were
included for bibliometric analysis. All extraction was done in one day, 26
March 2021. Excel, VOS viewer, and Science of Science (Sci2) software
were used.
Results: From all 625 articles, 438 original and 90 review articles were
included. These documents had 9192 citations and an H-index of 48. The
first paper was published in 2008 and the numbers were increased to more
than 90 papers in 2018. Top three countries were USA (n=130 documents),
Switzerland (n=101) and Italy (n=67). “Osteoporosis International” (n=80),
“Journal of Clinical Densitometry” (n=49), and “Bone” (n=38) had the
highest participation in publishing. Keyword occurrence analysis showed
that research hotspots on TBS were “TBS and BMD predict the risk of
osteoporotic fracture”, “TBS evaluates bone quality from DXA indepen-
dent of BMD”, and “TBS assesses a vertebral fracture risk in breast cancer,
primary hyperparathyroidism, and diabetes”. The most share of articles
were on human studies (n=409) with the top three underlying diseases of
diabetes (n=36), osteoporosis (n=20), and hyperparathyroidism (n=17).
The bursting words of the titles and abstracts were shown in Figure 1a
and Figure 1b, respectively. “Prevent”, “Reproduct” and “Chronic” were
the bursting words of the abstracts during recent years.
Conclusion: This study reported the most active countries and journals
published on TBS. Although in the beginning, TBS were used to predict
fractures, considering the bursting words, in the near future, it can be
expected to be used in other areas of osteoporosis as well.
Figure. The bursting (emerging and fading) words of titles (a) and ab-
stracts (b) of TBS articles. The area size of each word represents its
weight which is affected by its frequency.
P580
OSTEOPOROSIS AND SARCOPENIA IN RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS PATIENTS: ASSOCIATION WITH VITAMIN D
STATUS AND CALCIUM INTAKE
N. Toroptsova1, O. Dobrovolskaya1, N. Demin1, M. Cherkasova1, E.
Samarkina1, O. Nikitinskaya1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To assess vitamin D status and dietary calcium intake (DCI) in
relation to BMD and sarcopenia (SP) in women with rheumatoid arthritis
(RA).
Methods: 86 patients (pts) (mean age 58.1±8.5 y) with RA, confirmed by
the criteria of ACR/EULAR (2010), were enrolled. The examination
included assessment of the DCI and vitamin D level (25(OH)D), muscle
strength (MS) tests (hand grip strength, “chair stand” test), DXA of lum-
bar spine, proximal hip and whole body. Osteoporosis (OP) confirmed
according to WHO criteria, SP in the presence of low MS and reduced
appendicular muscle mass (AMM) or appendicular mass index (AMI) –
AMM/height2 (kg/m2).
Results: Low BMD was detected in 62 (72.1%) pts: OP in 24 (27.9%),
and osteopenia in 38 (44.2%). Reduced MS was found in 74 (86.0%) pts -
probable SP, but only 21 (24.4%) pts had also a low AMI and/or AMM
confirmed SP. 26 (30.2%) pts had DCI accordingly with the recommend-
ed standards. The median of DCI was 737[539; 1073] mg/d, in pts with
OP - 565[401; 853] mg/d, while in women with normal BMD - 870[783;
1204] mg/d (p=0.038) and with osteopenia - 720[539; 765] mg/d
(p>0.05). Vitamin D insufficiency was found in 40 (46.5%) and deficien-
cy - in 28 (32.6%) pts. 25(OH)D did not differ in pts with OP, osteopenia,
and normal BMD and was 22.7[16.2; 29.6] ng/ml, 22.4[18.9; 27.8] ng/ml
and 22.0[17.7; 26.9] ng/ml, respectively. Only 42 (49%) pts received
supplements of cholecalciferol with/without calcium: 41% of pts with
low vitamin D level and 78% women with normal 25(OH)D (p<0.01).
Hand grip strength did not associate with 25(OH)D in RA pts. The me-
dian values of AMM/AMI in individuals who received vitamin D and
calcium supplements were 17.4[15.9; 19.1] kg/ 7.0[6.2; 8.1] kg/m2, com-
paring to pts without supplements – 19.5[18.0; 20.5] kg/ 7.5[6.6; 7.9] kg/
m2 (p>0.05). Pts with and without SP had 25(OH)D level 20.8[17.6;
26.8] ng/ml and 24.7[20.4; 33.8] ng/ml, respectively (p=0.039).
Conclusion: 79.1% of women with RA had low levels of vitamin D.
25(OH)D was significantly lower in RA pts with SP. No association
was found between 25(OH)D and BMD. DCI was significantly lower
in pts with OP compared to those with normal BMD. There were no
significant differences in both AMM/AMI values and MS, depending
on the additional intake of calcium and vitamin D.
P581
CLINICAL IMPACT OF FRAX-BASED INTERVENTION
THRESHOLDS IN CHILEAN OLDER WOMEN
L. Imaicela Naula1, E. Lopez Gavilanez2
1AECE Research Group, The Association of Clinical Endocrinologists of
Ecuador, 2AECE Research Group, The Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists of Ecuador; Servicio Endocrinología, Hospital
Docente Policía Nacional Guayaquil No.2. Ecuador, Guayaquil, Ecuador
Objective: To evaluate the clinical impact of age-specific FRAX-based
intervention and assessment thresholds in older women of the Chilean
population.
Methods: 1123 women aged 60-94 were selected from the 2016-2017
National Health Survey (ENS 2016-2017). We calculate the risk of major
osteoporotic fractures and femur neck with the FRAX model specific to
the Chilean population. And we calculate the proportion of women eligi-
ble for intervention and measurement of BMD.
Results: On average 3% of the population qualified for intervention and
59% for assessment with BMD. The proportion of the population
S295
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
potentially eligible for intervention varied from 0.73-6.31% depending on
age, and the proportion eligible for assessment with BMD varied from
42.50-62.46% depending on age.
Conclusion: In Chilean older women, applying these intervention and
assessment thresholds based on the FRAX model avoids unnecessary
intervention in low-risk subjects and reduces the number of referrals to
DXA scanning and the unnecessary cost of routine BMD measurement.
P582
OSTEOPOROSIS, FRACTURES AND FRACTURE RISK IN
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS PATIENTS
O. Dobrovolskaya1, O. Nikitinskaya1, A. Efremova1, N. Toroptsova1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To assess the risk of major osteoporotic fracture (MOF) in
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients (pts) based on the identification of
individuals with osteoporosis (OP), previous fragility fractures (FF) and
high 10-y probability of a MOF.
Methods: 295 postmenopausal women with RA confirmed according to
ACR/EULAR criteria (2010) were included in the study (mean age 63±7
y). The median RA duration was 11[4; 16] y, and postmenopause - 13[6;
20] y. 121 (41%) pts were treated with glucocorticoids (GCs). A survey
was conducted to identify pts with risk factors and a history of FF. All pts
underwent DXA of the proximal femur and lumbar spine. The 10-y
probability of a MOF was assessed using the FRAX tool. In pts treated
with GCs at a dose >7.5 mg in prednisolone equivalent FRAX estimates
of probabilities of a MOF were adjusted according to the recommenda-
tions [1].
Results. OP in at least one region of interest (ROI) was found in 97
(32.9%), osteopenia in 128 (43.4%), normal BMD in 70 (23.7%) pts.
83 (28.1%) pts had a prior FF: 44 (14.9%) – 1, 20 (6.8%) – 2, and 19
(6.4%) – 3 or more. 68 (23%) pts had vertebral fracture, 47 (15.9%) -
distal forearm fracture and only 2 (0.7%) - hip fracture, among them OP
in at least one ROI was found in 71 (85.5%) pts and normal BMD in 3
(3.6%) persons. The 10-y probability of a MOF was calculated in 198 RA
pts without OP. The median FRAX value for these pts was 16% [9; 26].
38 (19.2%) pts were at very high risk, 34 (17.2%) at low risk, and 126
(63.6%) at moderate risk. After recalculation of fracture risk with includ-
ing femoral neck BMD in pts at moderate risk additional 27 (13.6%)
became at high risk, 3 (1.5%) at very high risk, and 96 (76.0%) at low
risk. Thus, 68 (34.3%) RA pts without low BMD were at very high or
high risk and 130 (65.7%) at low risk of MOF assessed by FRAX.
Additionally, 97 pts had OP, 3 persons with a history of FF after age of
40 years old had normal BMD and low risk of fracture according to
FRAX.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrated that 165 (55.9%) postmenopausal
women with RA had high risk of fractures and indications for anti-
osteoporotic treatment based on the results of BMD measurement and a
10-year probability of MOF using FRAX tool.
Reference: 1. Kanis JA, et al. Osteoporos Int 2011;22:809.
P583
A FRACTURE LIAISON SERVICE IMPLEMENTATION
AFTER TWO YEARS: A RETROSPECTIVE COHORT STUDY
S. P. Silva1, C. Mazeda1, P. Vilas-Boas1, B. Figueiredo1, A. Barcelos1
1Centro Hospitalar Baixo Vouga, Aveiro, Portugal
Objective: This study aims to evaluate the implementation of a Fracture
Liaison Service (FLS), describing the profile and outcome of patients
evaluated.
Methods: Retrospective study of patients, aged 50 or over, observed
between 2019-2020, in a FLS in our hospital for a fragility fracture. A
baseline questionnaire was made in the first visit. One year later, patients
were asked about their functional disability, therapeutic compliance, and
new fractures. Demographic, comorbidities, and clinical results were col-
lected. Descriptive analysis used medians and interquartile range (IQR)
for continuous data as frequencies and percentages for qualitative
variables.
Results: A total of 297 patients were followed up and 85 patients were
loss to follow-up over the period study. 83% were female with a median
age of 79 (IQR 17.50) years old. Most of the patients (62.3%) who
suffered a fracture were functionally independent before the fracture oc-
curred. The types of fractures found in this study included: trochanteric
fractures (103 patients, 48.6%), vertebral fractures (25 patients, 11.8%),
malleolar fractures (16 patients, 7.5%), humeral fractures (10 patients,
4.7%) and other fractures (15 patients, 7.1%). 25 patients (11.8%) never
had fracture but were evaluated for other osteoporosis (OP) risk factors.
The OP risk factors founded in this study were corticotherapy (8.5%),
history of parental hip fracture (9.0%), early menopause (23.2%), diabe-
tes mellitus (23.6%), inflammatory rheumatic disease (2.8%), thyroid
disease (10.4%), smoking (6.1%) and alcohol abuse (7.1%). Moreover,
2 patients (0.9%) were diagnosed with osteogenesis imperfecta. All pa-
tients received nutritional advice, lifestyle recommendations and fall pre-
vention information and 63.2% of the patients started OP medication. In
follow-up, 107 patients (50.4%) were functionally independent after the
fracture, and 76 patients (46.3%) kept compliant with prescribed medica-
tion. Only 6 (2.8%) patients had a new fracture. 12 patients (5.7%) died
over the period study. No incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw was
reported.
Conclusion: The implementation of a FLS has enhanced the identifica-
tion and initiation of treatment in patients with high risk of OP. Further, it
helps to evaluate pharmacological compliance, to prevent new fractures.
P584
CORRELATION BETWEEN THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
A N A E S T H E S I O L O G Y ( A S A ) S C O R E A N D T H E
NOTTINGHAM HIP FRACTURE SCORE (NHFS) IN
ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH ACUTE HIP FRACTURE
N. Obiechina1, A. Michael2
1Queen's Hospital, Burton, 2Russells Hall Hospital, Dudley, UK
Objective: The American Society of Anaesthesiology (ASA) score is a
well recognized, validated scoring tool for pre-operative physical status in
surgical patients and has been used in risk stratification of hip fracture
patients in the UK for decades. The Nottingham Hip Fracture Score
(NHFS) is also a validated tool that predicts 30-d mortality post hip
fracture surgery. It incorporates age, gender, mini mental test score, num-
ber of comorbidities, preoperative haemoglobin, living in an institution
S296
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
and malignancy. Aims: To assess the relationship between ASA and
NHFS in elderly hip fracture patients. To determine whether the presence
or absence of frailty affects this relationship.
Methods: A retrospective, cross-sectional analysis was carried out on
acute hip fracture patients 60 y and older admitted to a UK district general
hospital. Data was extracted manually from the electronic records.
Patients with incomplete data were excluded. Rockwood clinical frailty
scale (CFS) was used to group patients into pre-frail and frail groups.
Patients with a score of 1-4 (i.e., very fit, well, managing well and vul-
nerable) were considered pre-frail while those with a score of 5–9 (i.e.,
mildly, moderately, severely and very severely frail and the terminally ill)
were considered frail. SPSS 27 software was used for statistical analysis.
Descriptive statistics was used to portray baseline characteristics.
Spearman correlation coefficient and linear regression was used to assess
correlation.
Results: 263 patients were included in the analysis. Mean age was 82.2 y
±8.48. 73 (28%) of the patients were pre-frail and 190 (72%) were frail.
There was statistically significant positive correlation between ASA and
NHFS (r=0.490; p<0.001). This relationship was much stronger in the
pre-frail than in the frail group of patients (r=0.521; p<0.001) and
(r=0.282; p<0.001) respectively.
Conclusion: In our sample of elderly patients with acute hip fracture, the
ASA score was positively correlated with the NHFS and the correlation
was stronger in pre-frail patients compared to in the frail patients.
P585
SARCOPENIA SCREENING TOOL (SARC-F) SCORE AND
ROCKWOOD CLINICAL FRAILTY SCALE (CFS) IN
PATIENTS 60 YEARS AND OLDER WITH ACUTE HIP
FRACTURE
N. Obiechina1, A. Michael2
1Queen's Hospital, Burton, 2Russells Hall Hospital, Dudley, UK
Objective: SARC-F is a well validated screening tool for identifying
patients with sarcopenia. It has five components, which include strength,
assistance with walking, rising from a chair, climbing stairs and falls. It is
based on patients’ or their carers’ rating of their abilities. SARC-F has
been shown to have high specificity (94.4-98.7%) but low sensitivity
(4.2-9.9%). It is important to screen patients with acute hip fracture for
sarcopenia, to detect those at risk for adverse outcomes. SARC-F can be
used as a screening tool for these patients, as many of them are not mobile
in the immediate peri-operative period. Sarcopenia and frailty overlap;
with low grip strength and slow gait speed (in Fried phenotype of frailty)
being characteristic of both, and treatment options overlap. Aims: Is there
a correlation between sarcopenia and frailty in acute hip fracture patients?
Methods: A retrospective, cross-sectional analysis was carried out on
consecutive patients, 60 y and older, admitted with acute hip fracture to
a district general hospital in a 12-month period. Sarcopenia screening tool
(SARC-F) was completed during interviews conducted by the occupa-
tional therapists. Rockwood Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS) was used to
assess frailty. Data was manually extracted from anonymized electronic
health records. Patients with incomplete data were excluded from the
analysis. SPSS 27 was used for statistical analysis. Descriptive statistics
were used to assess baseline characteristics of the patients studied.
Spearman’s correlation coefficient and linear regression was used to de-
termine and quantify correlation.
Results: 310 patients were included: 83 men and 227 women. Mean age
was 82.2 y±8.48. There was a strong positive correlation between SARC-
F score and Rockwood CFS (r=0.835; p<0.001). When broken down by
gender this relationship persisted (r=0.765; p<0.001 in males and
r=0.864; p<0.001 in females).
Conclusion: SARC-F score is strongly positively correlated with
Rockwood CFS in patients 60 y and older with acute hip fracture. This
was not confounded by gender.
P586
LORECIVIVINT (SM04690), AN INTRA-ARTICULAR, SMALL-
MOLECULE CLK/DYRK INHIBITOR THAT MODULATES
THE WNT PATHWAY, AS A POTENTIAL TREATMENT FOR
MENISCAL INJURIES
T. Seo1, V. Deshmukh1, Y. Yazici1
1Biosplice Therapeutics, Inc., San Diego, USA
Objective: Meniscal injuries are the most common knee pathology asso-
ciated with pain, stiffness, and swelling. Meniscal damage is a frequent
MRI finding in knee osteoarthritis (OA). Efforts to repair meniscal dam-
age are largely unsuccessful and do not prevent progression of degener-
ative changes that lead to knee OA. Regulation of the Wnt pathway
during meniscal development suggests that manipulation of this pathway
may influence meniscal regenerative capacity. Lorecivivint (LOR) is an
intra-articular (IA), small-molecule CLK/DYRK inhibitor that modulates
the Wnt pathway. In preclinical studies, LOR was evaluated for its pro-
tective and anabolic effects in ex vivo explants and in a rat model of
chemically induced inflammatory meniscal degeneration.
Methods: Effects of LOR (30 nM) on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
expression in cultured rat menisci treated with IL-1β were measured by
qRT-PCR. In vivo, a single IA injection of LOR (0.3 mg) or vehicle was
given immediately after injection of monosodium iodoacetate (MIA).
Knees were harvested on Days 1, 4, and 11 and menisci were isolated.
Anti-inflammatory effects were evaluated by qRT-PCR for TNFA and
IL6 expression. Meniscal protection was evaluated by qRT-PCR for
MMPs and aggrecanase. Anabolic effects were evaluated by qRT-PCR
for collagens.
Results: In ex vivo meniscal explants, LOR inhibited expression of
MMP1, MMP3, and MMP13 compared with DMSO (P<0.01). In vivo,
LOR significantly decreased expression of MMPs and aggrecanase
(P<0.05) and reduced expression of inflammatory cytokines TNFA and
IL6 compared with vehicle in the rat model of inflammatory meniscal
degeneration at Day 4 after MIA injection. Additionally, LOR increased
expression of collagen types I, II, and III at Day 11 after MIA injection
(Fig. 1).
Conclusion: LOR exhibited protective effects in the meniscus ex vivo
and in vivo by reducing catabolic enzyme expression compared with
control. Anti-inflammatory effects of LOR were demonstrated by inhibi-
tion of inflammatory cytokine expression. Compared with vehicle, LOR
increased collagen expression in vivo, indicating potential meniscal ana-
bolic effects. These data support further investigation of LOR as a poten-
tial structure-modifying treatment for meniscal injuries.
P587
LORECIVIVINT (SM04690), AN INTRA-ARTICULAR, SMALL-
MOLECULE CLK/DYRK INHIBITOR THAT MODULATES
THE WNT PATHWAY, PROVIDED CARTILAGE-
PROTECTIVE EFFECTS IN AN ANIMAL MODEL OF POST-
TRAUMATIC OA
T. Seo1, V. Deshmukh1, Y. Yazici1
1Biosplice Therapeutics, Inc., San Diego, USA
Objective: Osteoarthritis (OA) is characterized by cartilage thinning,
bone remodeling, and inflammation. Post-traumatic OA, which develops
S297
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
after acute direct joint trauma, accounts for ~12% of OA cases. Current
therapeutic options focus on alleviating symptoms and pain and not dis-
ease modification. Lorecivivint (LOR), an intra-articular (IA), small-
molecule CLK/DYRK inhibitor that modulates the Wnt pathway, in-
duced chondrogenesis, protected cartilage, and reduced inflammation in
animal studies. A single IA LOR injection was evaluated in a rat model of
knee instability to determine its protective and regenerative effects when
injected after post-traumatic OA induction.
Methods: Post-traumatic OA was surgically induced in rats by combining
anterior cruciate ligament transection with partial medial meniscus transec-
tion (ACLT+pMMx). LOR (0.3 μg) or vehicle was injected into the dam-
aged knee IA space at 2, 3, or 4 weeks after OA induction. OA-induced
(n=10/group) or sham-operated (surgery without ACLT+pMMx; n=5/
group) rats were sacrificed at the injection timepoint (baseline) or 12 weeks
after LOR/vehicle injection (study end). Histological grades were assessed
using summed anterior and posterior medial femoral condyle (MFC) and
medial tibial plateau (MTP) OARSI scores (cartilage damage stage and
grade). Weight distribution was assessed at several timepoints with an
incapacitance meter. One-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple compar-
ison test was used for statistical analysis.
Results: ACLT+pMMx surgeries increased OARSI scores by 2 weeks
compared with sham surgeries. LOR treatment at Weeks 2, 3, and 4 led to
significant decreases (P<0.05) in total OARSI scores (Table 1) at study
end compared with vehicle treatment. Rats treated with LOR for 12
weeks and rats at baseline had similar OARSI scores, suggesting that
LOR treatment arrested cartilage damage progression. Significant im-
provements (P<0.05) were observed in the weight distribution of LOR-
treated rats in the 3- and 4-week groups at 6 and 12 weeks after their
respective IA injections compared with vehicle-treated rats.
Conclusion: LOR exhibited cartilage-protective effects and slowed dis-
ease progression in the ACLT+pMMx model in vivo. LOR has potential
as a structure-modifying treatment for OA.
P588
IMPACT OF LONG-TERM SYSTEMIC CORTICOSTEROIDS
ON BONE MINERAL DENSITY DURING DIFFUSE
INFILTRATING LUNG DISEASE
A. Chebbi1, H. Snene1, A. Fazaa2, H. Blibech1, S. Miladi2, K. Ben
Abdelghani2, N. Mehiri1, A. Laatar1, N. Ben Salah1, B. Louzir1
1Université Tunis El Manar, Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Service de
Pneumologie, CHU Mongi Slim La Marsa, 2Université Tunis El Manar,
Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Service de Rhumatologie, CHU Mongi
Slim La Marsa, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: To assess the impact of systemic corticosteroid therapy (SCT)
indicated in the treatment of diffuse infiltrating lung disease (DILD) on
the BMD assessed by bone densitometry.
Methods: Prospective study conducted in the pneumology department of
Mongi Slim-La Marsa Hospital for one year (2019), involving patients
with DILD in whom SCT was indicated in association with preventive
measures (calcium and vitamin D). After written consent, each patient
had the first measurement of BMD before starting SCT and then a control
measure between 6 and 12 months after the start of treatment.
Results: 28 patients were enrolled (medium age=55.8 y; sex ratio
F/H=3.5). All had the first measure of BMD and only 12 had a control
measure (interruption due to COVID-19 pandemic). In the remaining
group, the DILD treated were related to sarcoidosis (n=4), idiopathic
nonspecific interstitial lung disease (n=3), Gougerot Sjögren's syndrome
(n=2), HSP (n=1), Myositis (n=1), and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
(n=1). The average dose of prescribed SCT was 0.75 mg/kg/d. Based on
the measurement of the L1-L4 vertebrae, at the first measurement of the
BMD, 4 patients had no abnormalities, 3 had osteopenia and 5 had oste-
oporosis while at the control measure, 3 patients had no abnormalities, 3
had osteopenia and 6 had osteoporosis. Based on the measurement of the
right femur, at the first measurement of the BMD, 5 patients had no
abnormalities, 5 had osteopenia and 2 had osteoporosis while at the con-
trol measure, 3 patients had no abnormalities, 6 had osteopenia and 3 had
osteoporosis. This difference between initial and control BMD was sig-
nificant for the measurement at the right femur (p=0.001). Age was cor-
related with the decline of BMD in the L1-L4 vertebrae (p=0.024).
Conclusion: SCT is responsible for a significant decrease in BMD
despite preventive measures, hence the importance of routine os-
teoporosis screening and collaborative management with
rheumatologists.
P589
EFFECTS OF ACUTE EXERCISE ON BONE TURNOVER
MARKERS IN MIDDLE-AGED AND OLDER ADULTS: A
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
C. Smith1, A. Tacey1, J. Mesinovic2, D. Scott3, X. Lin1, T. C. Brennan-
Speranza4, J. R. Lewis5, G. Duque6, I. Levinger1
1Victoria University, Melbourne, 2Monash University, Melbourne,
3Deakin University, Melbourne, 4University of Sydney, Sydney, 5Edith
Cowan University, Perth, 6University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Objective: This systematic review examines the effects of acute aerobic
(AE), resistance (RE) and impact exercises on bone turnover markers
(BTMs) in middle and older-aged adults.
Methods: We searched PubMed, SCOPUS, Web of Science and
EMBASE up to 22 April 2020. Eligibility criteria included randomised
controlled trials (RCTs) and single-arm studies that included middle-aged
(50-65 y) and older adults (>65 y) and, a single-bout, acute-exercise (AE,
RE, impact) intervention with measurement of BTMs. PROSPERO reg-
istration number CRD42020145359.
Results: 13 studies were included; 8 in middle-aged (n=275, 212 women/
63 men, mean age=57.9±1.5 y) and 5 in older adults (n=93, 50 women/43
men, mean age=68.2±2.2 y). 11 studies included AE (7 middle-aged/4
older adults), and two included RE (both middle-aged). AE significantly
increased C-terminal telopeptide (CTX), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
bone ALP in middle-aged and older adults. AE also significantly in-
creased total osteocalcin (tOC) in middle-aged men and procollagen I
C-terminal propeptide and crosslinked C-terminal telopeptide of type I
collagen in older women. RE alone decreased ALP in older adults. In
middle-aged adults, RE with impact had no effect on tOC or BALP, but
significantly decreased CTX. Impact (jumping) exercise alone increased
procollagen type 1 N propeptide and tOC in middle-aged women. Quality
assessment results identifies a lack of RCTs, low quality evidence, small
sample sizes and large variance study protocols.
Conclusion: Acute exercise is an effective tool to modify BTMs, how-
ever, responses appear to be exercise modality-, intensity-, age- and sex-
specific. Higher quality and larger RCTs are needed in this area.
S298
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P590
HIP FRACTURES: OSTEOPOROSIS AND REHABILITATION
B. Mitrevska1, E. Nikolic Dimitrova1, V. Koevska1, C. Gerakaroska
Savevska1, M. Gocevska1, B. Kalcovska Ivanovska1, M. Manoleva1, E.
Grkova Miskovska1
1University Clinic of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Medical fac-
ulty, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia
Objective: Regarding femoral fractures, in addition to the fracture of the
femoral neck, fractures in the proximal part of the femur are more com-
mon. Pertrochanteric fractures are about four times more common than
femoral neck fractures. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of physical
therapy and rehabilitation with magnetic therapy vs. interference currents
Methods: The research included 90 patients, divided in two groups: study
group - 45 patients, treated with kinesiotherapy and magnetic therapy and
control group - 45 patients, treated with kinesiotherapy and interference cur-
rents. Measurement of the range of motion was performed at four time points.
Results: Regarding the functional status, the range of motion in all joints
of the lower extremities, in our study was performed a measurement of
the range of motion in the hip, knee and ankle at four time points, on
admission, discharge, and controls after 6 and 12 months. Overall, there
were improvements in the measurements at all time points, and a signif-
icant difference of the examined group, in relation to the control, was
obtained for flexion with straight and bent knee, for extension, abduction
of the hip, for flexion and extension of the knee on physical examination
after 12 months. When measuring adduction, internal and external rota-
tion, dorsal and plantar flexion of the ankle, there was no significant
difference between the two groups at all measured time points.
Conclusion: Kinesiotherapy in combination with physical modalities
leads to an increase in the range of motion of the joints in hip fractures.
P591
SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTORS AND PHYSICAL
FUNCTION: THE GAMBIAN BONE AND MUSCLE AGEING
STUDY (GAMBAS)
A. Zengin1, M. Ó Breasail2, C. P. Parsons3, L. M. Jarjou4, R. E. Janha4,
M. Jobe4, A. Prentice2, C. Cooper3, P. R. Ebeling1, K. A. Ward3
1Dept. of Medicine, School of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria,
Melbourne, Australia, 2MRC Nutrition and Bone Health Group,
Cambridge, UK, 3MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK, 4MRC Unit The Gambia at the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keneba, Gambia
Objective: In sub-Saharan Africa, the prevalence of obesity, cardiovas-
cular disease (CVD) and impaired physical function are increasing due to
rapid urbanisation. We investigated the associations between cardiac-
workload, arterial stiffness, peripheral vascular calcification (PVC) and
physical function in Gambian adults.
Methods: We recruited 249 women and 239 men aged 40-75+ y. Supine
blood pressure and heart rate were measured and used to calculate rate
pressure product (RPP) and pulse pressure (PP). Presence of PVC was
determined from tibia pQCT scans. Physical function was assessed by a
force platform to measure muscle force (kN) and power (kW) during a
chair rise test (CRT) and single 2-leg-jump (s2LJ); hand dynamometer
measured hand grip strength (HGS). Body composition was assessed
with DXA; body size corrections were made by dividing by height
squared (kg/m2) giving fat mass index (FMI) and appendicular lean mass
index (ALMI). Sex-interactions were tested (denoted as p-int) after ad-
justment for age and height. Data are expressed as 10% percent difference
in RPP or PP, per one-unit difference in physical functions measures.
Values are ß-coefficients with 95% confidence intervals. Mediation anal-
yses were performed with the mediator as ALMI/FMI.
Results: Mean age was similar in women (61±13 y) and men (61±12 y).
BMI was higher in women vs. men (21.9±3.7 vs. 20.9±3.1,p=0.0009).
There was a greater negative association between RPP and s2LJ power
after adjustments in men (-0.02 kW: -0.05,0.03) vs. women (0.04 kW:
0.004, 0.08), p-int=0.017; with no other significant interactions. In men,
there were greater negative associations between PP and CRT power (-
0.008 kW), s2LJ power (-0.03 kW) and HGS (-0.48 kg) vs. women (all p-
int<0.01). In men, presence of PVC was associated with lower s2LJ
power (-0.2 kW: -0.4,0.02, p-int=0.037) and HGS (-2.3 kg: -4.2, -0.4,
p-int=0.016). In men, FMI mediated the association between RPP and
CRT power (p=0.002), s2LJ force (p<0.001) and s2LJ power (p=0.001).
There was no significant mediation by ALMI; there were no mediation by
ALMI or FMI in women.
Conclusion: Multiple markers of CVD were associated with poorer
physical function in men, and these were mediated by FMI. There is a
need to identify preventative strategies to slow/prevent the rising burden
of CVD and poor physical function in sub-Saharan Africa.
P592
APFFA PRIMARY CARE TOOLKIT: EMPOWERING
FRAGILITY FRACTURE EDUCATION
Y. Choi1, K. Bruce2, D.-C. Chan3, J. Close4, M. Kheradi2, J. K. Lee5, L.
Mercado-Asis6, P. J. Mitchell7, R. D. Blank8
1Evidencia Medical Communications Pty Ltd, Sydney, Australia, 2Viva!
Communications Pty Ltd, Sydney, Australia, 3Superintendent Office,
National University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan,
4Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 5Beacon Hospital,
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia, 6University of the Philippines, Manila,
Philippines, 7Synthesis Medical NZ Limited, Auckland, New Zealand,
8Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia
Objective: The Asia Pacific Fragility Fracture Alliance (APFFA) is a
federation committed to reducing the burden of low trauma fracture
throughout the region. Education on fracture prevention to those at the
forefront of patient care is an important part of this effort.
Methods: APFFA has curated educational materials developed by others
(https://apfracturealliance.org/education-directory/) and developed a
Primary Care Physician (PCP) Education Toolkit (https://
apfracturealliance.org/education-toolkit/). Here we describe the toolkit
and report its introduction during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Results: The PCP Education Toolkit is designed as a half-day education-
al program together with supporting resources to highlight the role of
primary care providers in this effort. The educational program includes
a lecture focused on the burden of fracture, a lecture focused on clinical
assessment of fracture risk, a discussion kit, and materials to assist with
meeting planning. The discussion kit is designed to be adaptable to local
practices and constraints. The supporting material features a patient hand-
book that gives practical advice on nutrition, home safety, and issues to be
raised during medical encounters. COVID-19 hampered rollout of these
materials. In addition, APFFA has relied on its constituent organizations
to provide educational content to promote best practices in acute fracture
management, rehabilitation, and secondary fracture prevention through
the development of an education directory. The directory includes syn-
opses and links to high quality materials from around the world.
Conclusion: The PCP Education Toolkit was designed with the expec-
tation that the program would be presented as live meetings. The pan-
demic made this infeasible. Despite the restrictions, the PCP Education
Toolkit materials have been enthusiastically received in New Zealand and
disseminated by Osteoporosis NZ. As the world emerges from the pan-
demic, we are looking to present this material in more venues in 2022 and
beyond. The toolkit is available free of charge at the above address.
Acknowledgements: Development of the PCP Education Toolkit and
Education Directory was funded via an unrestricted grant from Amgen
Asia to APFFA and its content was developed independently by APFFA.
S299
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P593
OSTEOGENIC POTENTIAL OF PHYSICAL ACTVITIES AND
THEIR ASSOCIATIONS WITH BONE MASS IN YOUNG
ADULTS: THE RAINE STUDY
C.-A. Ng1, D. Scott2, M. Sim3, K. Zhu4, A. Siafarikas5, N. Hart3, M. M.
Cervo1, J. Tan6, P. Chivers7
1Dept. of Medicine, School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health,
Monash University, Clayton, 2Institute of Physical Activity and
Nutrition, School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin
University, Burwood, 3School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith
Cowan University, Joondalup, 4Medical School, University of Western
Australia, Perth, 5Dept. of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Perth Children's
Hospital, Nedlands, 6School of Nursing, Midwifery, Health Sciences and
Physiotherapy, University of Notre Dame Australia, Fremantle, 7Institute
for Health Research, University of Notre Dame Australia, Fremantle,
Australia
Objective: Physical activity questionnaires traditionally utilised in re-
search only assess metabolic equivalents of task (METs). It is unclear
whether mechanical loading intensity and rate during habitual physical
activity is associated with skeletal health. We investigated how physical
activity of high loading intensities and rates, assessed at ages 17 and 20 y,
(1) compares with physical activity measured in METs, and (2) is asso-
ciated with BMD at age 20 y.
Methods: A subset of 826 participants from the Raine Study Gen2 were
assessed for physical activity energy expenditure over the past week via
the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) at ages 17 and
20 y. Subsequently, loading scores were estimated from the IPAQ,
reflecting the total loading intensity and application rate of physical ac-
tivity. Whole-body, leg and arm BMD at age 20 y were assessed by DXA.
Results: Bland-Altman minimal detectable change for physical activity
Z-scores at age 17 and 20 y were 1.59 SD and 1.33 SD, respectively;
greater than the a priori minimal clinically important change of 0.5 SD.
Loading score, but not IPAQ score, had a significant positive association
with whole body and leg BMD after adjustment for covariates (β=7.52
and 24.80 mg/cm2 and β=7.51 and 24.36 mg/cm2 respectively for age 17
and 20 y loading scores). IPAQ score at age 20 y, but not loading score,
had a significant positive association with arm BMD following adjust-
ment (β=14.43 mg/cm2). There was no significant association between 3
y change in IPAQ or loading score and bone mass.
Conclusion: This study revealed clinically important disagreement in
associations of self-reported METs and loading scores estimates with
bone health in young adults. Participation in physical activity with higher
loading was significantly associated with whole body and leg BMD,
while higher energy expenditure was significantly associated with arm
BMD. Coupling traditional energy expenditure questionnaire outcomes
with bone-loading estimates may improve understanding of the location-
specific skeletal benefits of physical activity in young adults.
P594
LOW PLASMA 25(OH) VITAMIN D LEVEL AND COVID-19 IN
PATIENTS OF THE OLDER AGE GROUP
M. Fominykh1, O. Khromtsova1, K. Dorokhina1
1Federal State Budget Educational Institution of Higher Education “Ural
State Medical University” of the Ministry of Health of the Russian
Federation, Ekaterinburg, Russia
Objective: COVID-19 infection, which destroys the health of people and
the economy of countries, is a serious challenge to world science and
medicine. Global efforts to defeat this disease have identified a number
of risk factors and prognostic markers, one of which is a deficiency of
vitamin D in the blood serum. Vitamin D is known to stimulate innate
immunity and modulate acquired immunity. In the UK, the Royal College
of Physicians of London noted that patients who died from COVID-19
suffered from a serious vitamin D deficiency. According to research,
older people are more at risk of vitamin D deficiency due to lack of
sunlight (most of the time spent indoors) and malnutrition, so they may
have worse outcomes of COVID-19 infection. Although there is no direct
evidence of the effect of vitamin D status on COVID-19 infection, vita-
min D deficiency may worsen the course of COVID-19, especially in the
elderly patient group. This study aimed to evaluate associations of plasma
25(OH)D status with the likelihood of coronavirus disease (COVID‐19)
infection.
Methods: The study included 68 women who applied for an outpatient
appointment in the Central clinical hospital №7 (Ekaterinburg (RF) in the
period from February 1 to April 30, 2021 who were tested for COVID‐19
infection and who had at least one previous blood test for plasma
25(OH)D level. Low plasma 25(OH)D level was defined as plasma 25‐
hydroxyvitamin D concentration below the level of 30 ng/mL.
Results: Among 68 individuals, 23.5% were COVID‐19‐positive, and
76.5% COVID‐19‐negative. The mean plasma vitamin D level was sig-
nificantly lower among COVID-positive patients in comparison with the
negative ones (27.2 ng/mL (95%CI 19.29‐31.55) vs. 29.1 (95%CI 26.0‐
32.2)). The women’ age ranged from 52-87, the mean 67.9. Next, we
divided the patients into two age groups: the first group was middle-aged
and elderly (50 women), the second group was senile (18 women). The
mean age in the first group was 64.1 y, in the second group-80.7. Among
the senile group, vitamin D levels in the COVID-19 group were generally
significantly lower than in the COVID-19 negative group (20.8 vs. 37.7
nmol/L), p<0.05. There were no statistically significant data on the rela-
tionship between COVID-19 and vitamin D deficiency in the first group.
All patients with COVID-19 in the older age group were hospitalized due
to their age.
Conclusion: Low plasma 25(OH)D level appears to be an independent
risk factor for COVID‐19 infection in patients of the older age group.
P595
APFFA-FFN HIP FRACTURE REGISTRY TOOLBOX: A
RESOURCE TO SUPPORT REGISTRY IMPLEMENTATION
P. J. Mitchell1, H. Seymour2, E. Ahern3, M. Costa4, J. Magaziner5, J. K.
Lee6, D.-C. Chan7, R. D. Blank8, J. Close9
1School of Medicine, University of Notre Dame Australia, Sydney,
Australia, 2Dept. of Geriatrics and Aged Care, Fiona Stanley Hospital,
Murdoch, Australia, 3Dept. of Geriatric Medicine, Cork University
Hospital, County Cork, Ireland, 4Oxford Trauma, Nuffield Dept. of
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 5University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, USA, 6Beacon Hospital, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia,
7Superintendent Office, National University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch,
Hsinchu, Taiwan, 8Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney,
Australia, 9Falls, Balance and Injury Research Centre, Neuroscience
Research Australia, Sydney, Australia
Objective: Hip fracture registries provide a mechanism to benchmark
care provided by hospitals against clinical standards. As of May 2021,
registries have been established in approximately one tenth of countries
worldwide. A hip fracture registry toolbox is intended to provide practical
tools to support registry development.
Methods: The toolbox has been developed as a collaboration between the
Asia Pacific Fragility Fracture Alliance (APFFA) Hip Fracture Registry
Working Group and the Fragility Fracture Network (FFN) Hip Fracture
Audit Special Interest Group.
Results: The toolbox summarises essential components of national qual-
ity improvement programmes for hip fracture care. This features best
practice clinical standards, including quality indicators (e.g., measures
relating to pain assessment, time to surgery, early mobilisation, secondary
fracture prevention and multidisciplinary management). Hip fracture reg-
istries provide the technical infrastructure for hospital teams to bench-
mark the care they provide against quality indicators. The toolbox also
focuses on practical aspects of registry establishment including clinical
S300
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
leadership and engagement, getting buy-in from diverse stakeholders,
building the case for change, registry planning and funding, piloting a
registry, governance and ethics considerations, and a minimum common
data set and data dictionary.
A summary of the extensive literature on multidisciplinary care of hip
fracture patients is provided, in addition to detailed case studies of na-
tional registries in Australia and New Zealand, Spain and the UK. A series
of short interviews published on YouTube complement the toolbox with
experience from leaders of well-established registries.
Conclusion: The APFFA-FFN hip fracture registry toolbox provides a
distillation of the global experience to date in establishing national regis-
tries. The toolbox is free for download from www.apfracturealliance.org/
HFR-toolbox and is intended to support colleagues throughout the world
who would like to establish a registry in their country.
Acknowledgement: Development of the Hip Fracture Registry Toolbox
was funded via an unrestricted grant from Amgen Asia to APFFA and its
content was developed independently by APFFA and FFN.
P596
GENE SET ENRICHMENT ANALYSES REVEALED
MULTIPLE GENE SET ASSOCIATED WITH STEROID-
INDUCED OSTEONECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD
C. Wang1, W. Tian1, Y. Guo1
1Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Biomedical Informatics & Genomics Center, School of Life
Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China
Objective: Steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head (SONFH),
which is caused by long-term and high-dose glucocorticoid use, has been
accounting for 57% of the total femoral head necrosis. In our previous
study, we collected femoral head sample from patients with SONFH and
normal control, the followed KEGG pathway enrichment analyses iden-
tified several known and novel pathway associated with SONFH, but
there are many pathways related to biological processes that are not in-
cluded in the KEGG pathway database, in addition, In addition, KEGG
pathway enrichment analysis does not use the information about the mag-
nitude of gene expression changes. Gens set enrichment analyses could
make up for above two shortcomings. The object of this project is to
identify gene sets that involve in the pathogenesis of SONFH via gene
set analyses.
Methods: Based on the 735 differentially expressed genes (DEGs,
P≤0.05) identified between femoral head samples from patients with
SONFH and those from normal control. Then, we ranked the DEGs
according to the log2(Fold-change) from largest to smallest and stored
the ranked DEGs list in a file with the suffix ‘.rnk’. Next, the human gene
set annotation file (msigdb.v7.4.symbols.gmt), which contain all gene set,
was downloaded from GSEA web set. Finally, the rank DGEs list file and
the gene set annotation file were loaded to the GSEA desktop software
and the “Run GSEAPreranked” tools was used for the gene set enrich-
ment analyses with the default parameters and the enrichment score(ES)
and FWER p-Value were calculated by the GSEA software.
Results: The DEGs were significantly enriched in 11 gene sets (FWER p-
val ≤0.01). The most enriched gene set was NABA_CORE_
MATRISOME (ES=0.656, FWER p-val ≤0.0001). Other significantly
enriched gene sets including HADDAD_B_LYMPHOCYTE_
P R O G E N I T O R ( E S = 0 . 7 4 9 , F W E R p - v a l ≤0 . 0 0 1 ) ,
NABA_ECM_GLYCOPROTEINS (ES=0.690, FWER p-val ≤0.001)
GOMF_EXTRACELLULAR_MATRIX_STRUCTURAL_CONSTIT-
U E N T ( E S = 0 . 6 3 2 , F W E R p - v a l ≤0 . 0 0 1 ) , G O M F _
STRUCTURAL_MOLECULE_ACTIVITY (ES=0.560, FWER p-val ≤
0.000), GOCC_COLLAGEN_CONTAINING_EXTRACELLULAR_
MATRIX (ES=0.489, FWER p-val ≤0.001), HAY_BONE_
MARROW_STROMAL (ES=0.438, FWER p-val=0.002),
HP_ABNORMAL_JAW_MORPHOLOGY (ES=0.509, FWER p-
val=0.004), HP_APLASIA_HYPOPLASIA_INVOLVING_
T H E _ S K E L E T O N ( E S = 0 . 4 8 4 , F W E R p - v a l = 0 . 0 0 5 ) ,
YTATTTTNR_MEF2_02 (ES=0.536, FWER p-val=0.005),
GSE9509_LPS_VS_LPS_AND_IL10_STIM_IL10_KO_MACROPH-
AGE_30MIN_DN (ES=0.685, FWER p-val=0.008).
Conclusion: Overall, by performing gene set enrichment analyses, we
identified 11 candidate gene sets associated with SONFH and this could
provide new insights into the SONFH pathophysiology.
Acknowledgements: This study is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31970569); Natural Science Basic
Research Plan of Shaanxi Province (2019JM-119).
P597
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN HAND GRIP STRENGTH AND
FRACTURE RISK FRAX-BASED IN ECUADORIAN WOMEN
J. Valdiviezo Jara1, I. Jaramillo Encalada1, A. Segura Mestanza1, J.
Argüello Andrade1, K. Gaibor Urgiles1, L. Peñarreta Leon1, G. Gordillo
Mendoza1, D. García López2, E. Lopez Gavilanez2
1AECE Research Group, Association of Clinical Endocrinologists of
Ecuador, 2AECE Research Group, Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists of Ecuador; Servicio Endocrinología. Hospital
Docente Policía Nacional Guayaquil No.2. Ecuador, Guayaquil, Ecuador
Objective: To assess the relationship between hand grip strength (HGS),
age, BMI, waist-hip ratio (WHR), and 10-y fracture risk based on FRAX
model Ecuador without BMD in Ecuadorian women.
Methods: 2288 women 60 y and older were selected. A questionnaire
recorded demographic and anthropometric data, a personal and family
history of frailty fractures, current smoking, alcohol intake, fall history,
daily physical activity, glucocorticoids use, and causes of secondary os-
teoporosis. A portable dynamometer was used to measure HGS. For the
statistical analysis, we use the Epidat 4.2 software. Pearson’s coefficient
was used to evaluate the association between HGS, age, BMI, and the 10-
year fracture probability based on the FRAX model without BMD.
Results: The mean age was 70 (7.8), BMI 27.21(7.22), WHR
96.35(14.38), HGS 16.93(5.55), FRAX Major Osteoporotic Fracture
and Hip Fracture score were 2.90(2.35) and 1.23(1.45) respectively.
Table 1 presents the linear correlation analysis between HGS, age,
BMI, WHR, and FRAX score of the patients studied.
Conclusion: Low HGS is associated with a high FRAX score and can
contribute to fracture risk prediction. HGS measurement combined with
FRAX can be used in osteoporosis screening before proceeding with
costly measurement of BMD.
P598
MEASUREMENT OF TIBIA BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND
STRUCTURE USING ULTRALOW DOSE MULTIDETECTOR
CT SCANNER
M. Malekzadeh1, J. Keyak2, N. Mobini3, S. Abbasi-Rad3, N. Tofighirad4,
M. Shamsi5, A. Abbasian Ardakani1, M. B. Shiran1, H. Saligheh Rad6
S301
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Medical Physics Dept., School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 2Dept. of Radiological Sciences, Dept. of
Biomedical Engineering and Dept. of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, University of California, Irvine, USA, 3Medical Physics
and Biomedical Engineering Dept., Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 4Azad University of Tehran, Farhikhtegan
Hospital, Tehran, Iran, 5Imaging Center, Laleh Hospital, Tehran, Iran,
6Quantitative Medical Imaging Systems Group, Research Center for
Molecular and Cellular Imaging, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Lack of access to pQCT and HR-pQCT in our local area
motivated us to examine the feasibility of whole body CT under hybrid
iterative reconstruction (HIR) algorithms, ultralow dose setting, to quan-
tify volumetric BMD (vBMD) and bone structure of the lower extremity.
Methods: 50 healthy volunteers, 28 women and 22 men, age 30-60 years
old with T-score >-1, were recruited to be scanned with a Philips-
Brilliance scanner. To minimize dose, tibial (38% distal) vBMD was
quantified with either a liquid (50, 100 and 200 mg/cm3 dipotassium
hydrogen phosphate (K2HPO4)) or a solid (50, 100 and 250 mg/cm3
calcium hydroxyapatite (CHA)) calibration phantom and we applied a
crosscalibration equation between liquid and solid phantoms to obtain
equivalent densities. Bone structure was analyzed by semi-automated
segmentation using MATLAB software.
Results: After applying the crosscalibration equation, BMDK2HPO4=1.34
BMDCHA + 13.43, the cortical vBMD were 1188.07±29.38 CHA mg/
cm3 and 1600.92±39.51 K2HPO4 mg/cm3, which the CHA result is com-
parable to pQCT solid based measurements in the literature (1). The
cortical thickness was about 5 mm. The effective dose was in the daily
background level, about 10μSV.
Conclusion: In comparison with the existing literature, the results pro-
vide novel insight into peripheral bone quantification for this weight-
bearing bone under ultralow dose setting in whole body CT, which might
be an alternative to pQCT with an acceptable radiation dose.
Improvement of acquired image resolution and control on delivered ra-
diation doses have brought an opportunity to use an advanced clinical
CT-Scanner to quantify vBMD and macrostructure of extremities.
However, using advanced images acquisition set up and reconstruction
algorithms are required to reach an acceptable level of sensitivity and
specificity to identify patients at the risk of the fragility fracture. We
strongly recommend a comparison of cortical vBMD from QCT HIR
with BMD from pQCT and HR-pQCT in a community where these
modalities are available.
Reference: 1. Darling AL, et al. Bone 2013;55:36.
P599
USE OF SALVIA OFFICINALIS MOUTHWASH IN THE
TREATMENT OF PERI-IMPLANTITIS
G. Ciavoi1, R. Iurcov1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
Objective: Peri-implantitis is a complication following an implant inser-
tion in the maxillary or mandibular bone. Failure to stop the process can
lead to loss of the implant. Salvia officinalis L. (Salviae folium) extract is
recognized for its anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial effects. The aim of
our study was to determine the effectiveness of mouthwash based on
Salvia officinalis extract (SM) vs. commercial mouthwash (CM).
Methods: We used mouthwash with Salvia officinalis extract and com-
mercial mouthwash in a group randomly divided of 32 patients with peri-
implantitis. Patients were trained to ensure proper oral hygiene and use
mouthwash. They were monitored at 24 h, 3 d and one week.
Results: There was an improvement in symptoms, at 24 h control (de-
creased pain, inflammation and local bleeding) at 10 patients (62.5%) in
the CM group and 9 patients (56.2%) in the IM group. At 3 d, the onset of
the healing process was found in 11 (68.7%) patients in the CM group and
9 (56.2%) in the IM group. At one week the healing occurred in 14
(87.5%) patients in the CM group. 2 patients (1 from each group) needed
surgery with implant removal. 3 patients (1 from CM group and 2 from
CM group) need other surgical procedures.
Conclusion: There are no significant differences between the 2 groups in
terms of therapeutic results. Due to their reduced side effects and thera-
peutic effects similar to commercial products, they can be an alternative to
conventional treatments or an adjunct in therapy.
P600
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC IN
COMMUNITY-DWELLING GREEK OLDER ADULTS
M. Tsekoura1, M. Roukounaki1, E. Giannoulatou1, G. Kolokithas2, A.
Sakellaropoulou2, A. Gridelas2, E. Billis1, J. Gliatis3, C. Matzaroglou1, V.
Sakellari4, E. Tsepis1
1Dept. of Physiotherapy, School of Health Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Patras, Aigio, 2Dept. of Elderly, Open Care Centres for
the Elderly, Social Organization Municipality of Patras, Patras, 3Dept.
of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Patras, Patras,
4Dept. of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health and Care Sciences,
University of West Attica, Athens, Greece
Objective: To investigate the self-reported impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on physical activity (PA) amongst Greek older adults.
Methods: This was a cross-sectional study involving 350 adults, all over
60 y of age. Participants were recruited from community centers of
Achaia (Open Care Centers for Older Adults), in Western Greek mainland
during the period of January-March 2021. The information was gathered
through telephone interviews. Questions on social demographics, health
history, diagnosis, quarantine and hospitalization were asked, as well as
impact of the pandemic health status and physical activity behavior. The
level of PA was assessed via the International Physical Activity
Questionnaire (IPAQ) questionnaire while anxiety and depression via
the Hospital and Anxiety and Depression scale (HADS). The study pro-
tocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of the University of Patras.
Results: 350 older adults (265 women, 85 men; mean age of 72.28±6.73
y) completed the survey. About half of the sample (n=153; 43.5%) re-
ported a decrease in physical activity due to the pandemic and social
isolation restrictions. From the total sample, 211 older adults (59.9%)
recorded fear of COVID-19 infection and 9 participants (2.6%) reported
to have been diagnosed with the COVID-19 infection. The findings of
this study demonstrated that PA was associated with place of living
(r=0.55; p≤0.001), incidence of falls (r=0.45; p≤0.001), COVID-19 in-
fection (r=0.6; p≤0.001), fear of COVID-19 infection (r=0045; p≤0.05)
and anxiety (r=0.5; p≤0.001)..
Conclusion: In summary, a decline in PA due to COVID-19 pandemic
was reported by the majority of Greek older adults. Results of the present
study show that the COVID-19 pandemic may have induced PA behavior
changes in many older adults, which may accelerate their risk of devel-
oping frailty, sarcopenia and disability. Interventions to improve PA in
older adults should take account social and community factors and should
be key components of current and future pandemic plans, particularly for
vulnerable groups.
P601
FEMORAL NECK WARD'S TRIANGLE BONE MINERAL
DENSITY: A FORGOTTEN INDICATOR OF BONE LOSS
M. Malekzadeh1, S. Abbasi-Rad2, M. B. Shiran1, J. Keyak3, M. Asadi4, J.
Abolghasemi5, A. Ghasem-Zadeh6, H. Saligheh Rad7
1Medical Physics Dept., School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 2Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering
Dept., Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 3Dept. of
Radiological Sciences, Dept. of Biomedical Engineering and Dept. of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California,
S302
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Irvine, USA, 4Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 5Dept. of Biostatistics,
School of public health, Iran University Medical of Sciences, Tehran,
Iran, 6Dept. of Endocrinology and Medicine, Austin Health, University
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 7Quantitative Medical Imaging
Systems Group, Research Center for Molecular and Cellular Imaging,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Cortical and trabecular bone are important for bone strength.
Osteoporotic fractures are caused by both cortical thinning and trabecular
bone loss. The hip is considered a cortical bone site but both cortical and
trabecular bone contribute to femoral bone strength. We hypothesized
that Ward's triangle BMD, assessed by DXA, can be an indicator of
trabecular bone loss or increased cortical porosity and may predict risk
of fragility fracture.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective study of 50 healthy participants,
28 women and 22 men, age 30-60 years old, with T-score >-1. The
trabecular bone score (TBS) of L1-L4 and the longitudinal relaxation time
(T1) of cortical bone free water distal tibia (38%) were quantified using
iNsight™software and variable repetition time (VTR) technique and
short echo time (STE) in a 1.5 T clinical magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), respectively.
Results: The mean Ward’s triangle BMD and its area were 0.66±0.13
g/cm2 and 1.19±0.09 cm2, respectively. In women the BMD of ward’s
triangle were significantly correlated positively with TBS and negatively
with cortical bone free water, r=0.46 and r=-0.46, respectively. The cor-
relations between BMD of Ward’s triangle and TBS and T1 were 0.62
and -0.57, respectively, and were higher in men compared with women
(Table).
Table 1. The correlation between femur parts BMD and T1 and TBS.
BMD (g/cm2)
T1 (ms)
TBS
Ward’s
Total
-0.52**
0.52**
Male
-0.57**
0.62**
Female
-0.46*
0.46**
Neck
-0.36**
0.31*
Troch
-0.27
0.31*
Inter-troch
-.038**
0.38**
Proximal-Femur
-.038**
0.37**
**Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is
significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
Conclusion: BMD of Ward's triangle could be a sensitive indicator for
early detection of bone loss in the femoral neck. Further studies and
improvement in DXA image analysis software would improve the sensi-
tivity and specificity of Ward’s triangle on prediction of fragility fracture.
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank from Medimaps
company (Geneva Switzerland) and their Iranian branch Takapo Teb
providing us with the TBS software for free.
P602
IN SILICO STUDY OF THE ACVR1-SMAD1 PROTEIN
COMPLEX INVOLVED IN FIBRODYSPLASIA OSSIFICANS
PROGRESSIVA (FOP)
D. Ortiz-López1, A. Salas Burgos1, I. Quevedo Langenegger2
1University of Concepción, Faculty of Biological Sciences.
Pharmacology Dept., 2University of Concepción, Faculty of Medicine,
Concepción, Chile
Objective: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare and
aggressive disease caused by point mutations at the intracellular part of
the ACVR1 receptor, that trigger extraskeleton bone growth replacing
connective tissues. The ACVR1 protein is a transmembrane protein with
kinase activity classified as a TGF-β factor receptor class 1. This receptor
takes part in the skeleton development by BMP signaling through the
activation of the SMAD1/5/8 transcription factors by phosphorylation.
There are no structures for the protein complex ACVR1-SMAD1/5/8
which has been identified as a transient complex, thus, it is difficult to
obtain its structure using X-ray diffraction or other experimental methods.
For this reason, we aimed to obtain a molecular model of the ACVR1-
SMAD1 protein complex using In silico methods.
Methods: The initial protein complex was predicted using molecular
docking considering spatial restrictions over the interacting residues de-
termined from published mutagenesis results. Molecular dynamics simu-
lations were executed to explore the complex stability, interprotein inter-
actions, and the feasibility of the phosphorylation reactions. Those simu-
lations consider the wildtype (WT) ACVR1, and the mutant variants
ACVR1 Q207D and R206H, which correspond to the most frequent
FOP mutations.
Results: Docking results show that just one cluster of models can adjust
restrictions. After 500ns of simulations, the complex preserves its general
shape. In the WT complex we identified two different conformations
where the phosphorylation reaction is highly probable. The mutant vari-
ants present changes in dynamic fluctuations of the GS domain with
effects over the active site dynamics.
Conclusion: We obtained the first model for the protein complex
ACVR1-SMAD1, which enables us to identify distinctive interactions
of the complex. FOP mutations at the GS domain show long distance
effects on the active site dynamics.
P603
SF-36 PHYSICAL FUNCTION AND GENERAL HEALTH
DOMAINS ARE INDEPENDENT PREDICTORS OF ACUTE
HOSPITAL LENGTH OF STAY AFTER HIP FRACTURE
SURGERY
C. H. S. Sim1, C. Y. Howe1, X. K. K. Tay1, R. Ganguly2, T. S. Howe1,
S. B. J. Koh1
1Singapore General Hospital, 2Duke-NUS, Singapore, Singapore
Objective: Various premorbid demographics and co-morbidities may
impact healthcare burden, but it is less understood how pre-fracture phys-
ical function and quality of life may modify these effects. The aim of this
study was to determine which quality of life and physical function do-
mains impact acute hospital burden, using length of stay (LOS) for pa-
tients after hip surgery as a proxy for healthcare resource,
Methods: We analyzed the association between 36-Item Short Form
Survey (SF-36) domains, EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D) and Parker Mobility
Score (PMS) vs. LOS, taking into account patient and hospital factors.
This retrospective study examines hip fracture data from a large tertiary
hospital in Singapore over the period of 2017-2020. Prefracture SF-36,
EQ-5D and PMS based on recall at hospitalization were correlated with
LOS using binary logistic regression on SAS. Age, gender, race, marital
status, payer type, ASA score, TTS, type of surgery, fracture type, POD1
mobilization, and discharge disposition were analyzed as potential
confounders.
Results: 1045 patients were included in this study with 704 females and
341 males. The mean age was 79.5+8.57 y (range 60-105) with an aver-
age LOS 13.64+10.0 d (range 2-114). On univariate analysis, PMS, EQ-
5D and all domains of SF-36 except bodily pain, emotional role and
mental health were associated significantly with LOS. Amongst the
QOL and PMS scores, only the domains of SF-36 Physical Function
(PF) (OR=0.993, p=0.0068) and general health perception (GH) (OR
0.992, p=0.0230) remained significant on the multivariate model.
Conclusion: After accounting for functional decline related to age and
comorbidity, our study showed that premorbid scores of SF36 PF and GH
domains remain independent significant factors associated with LOS in
S303
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
hip fracture patients after surgery. PH and GH before a hip fracture im-
pacts acute hospital LOS as recovery trajectories and needs for caregiving
may differ. Together with demographics, co-morbidities and fracture pat-
terns, premorbid SF36 physical function and general health may serve to
predict health resource consumption, and better stratify resource alloca-
tions and rehabilitative programs.
P604
PHARMACODYNAMICS OF ORAL CHOLECALCIFEROL IN
HEALTHY SUBJECTS WITH VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY: A
RANDOMIZED OPEN-LABEL STUDY
A. D. Fassio1, D. G. Gatti1, M. R. Rossini1, C. B. Benini1, E. B.
Bertoldo1, O. V. Viapiana1, C. D. Dartizio1, M. G. Gatti1, I. G.
Gavioli1, G. A. Adami1
1Rheumatology Unit, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Objective: In the present study, we describe the results of this study
focusing on the pharmacodynamic effects of these three different treat-
ment regimens on vitamin D metabolites, regulators of calcium and phos-
phate homeostasis, bone turnover markers, and Wnt inhibitors.
Methods: This is an open-label, randomized, parallel group study in
healthy vitamin D deficient subjects (baseline 25OHD <20 ng/mL) re-
ceiving cholecalciferol with three different schedules: 10,000 IU/d for 8
weeks followed by 1000 IU daily for 4 weeks; group A, 50,000 IU/week
for 12 weeks; group B and 100,000 IU every other week for 12 weeks;
group C. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25OH2D), 24,25-dihydroxyvita-
min D (24,25OH2D), PTH, ionized calcium, FGF-23, C-terminal
telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX-I), procollagen type I N-terminal
propeptide (PINP), bone alkaline phosphatase (BALP), Dkk-1 and
sclerostin were dosed at baseline, day 28, 53, 84, 112.
Results: Baseline characteristics of the enrolled subjects are reported in
Table. The absolute changes of all the tested biomarkers are depicted in
Figure. 1,25OH2D, increased at each time points. The increase was great-
er (p<0.05) for group A vs. B and C at day 28, and vs. group B at day 56.
No significant difference among groups was seen for the other biomark-
ers. 24,25OH2D remained stable over time. PTH decreased at day 84.
FGF-23 increased at all time points. CTX-I, PINP slightly increased at
day 28. BALP, decreased from day 56 onward. Dkk-1 increased from day
56 onward, while sclerostin did not show significant changes.
Conclusion: The results of our study in healthy vitamin D-deficient sub-
jects show relevant effects of vitamin D supplementation on multiple
regulators of calcium, phosphate and bone metabolism, without any ma-
jor differences among the three treatment schedules.
Disclosures: Davide Gatti has received advisory board honoraria, con-
sultancy fees and/or speaker fees from Amgen, Celgene Eli-lilly, MSD-
Italia, Organon, UCB.
Maurizio Rossini has received advisory board honoraria, consultancy fees
and/or speaker fees from Abiogen, Amgen, Abbvie, BMS, Celgene, Eli-
Lilly, Galapagos, Grunenthal, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, Sandoz,
Theramex, UCB.
Table. Subjects demographic at baseline. No statistical differences were
observed among groups.
Baseline
characteristics
ALL subjects
(n=75)
Group A
(n=25)
Group B
(n=25)
Group C
(n=25)
Demographic
Age - years
Years (SD)
34.1 (10.2)
30.2 (10)
36.7 (8.8)
35.4 (11)
Sex
Male
N (%)
31 (41.3%)
12 (48%)
7 (28%)
12 (48%)
Female
N (%)
44 (58.7%)
13 (52%)
18 (72%)
13 (52%)
Weight (kg)
Mean (SD)
66.7 (12.4)
65.2 (13.5)
67.4 (9.8)
67.6 (13.7)
BMI (Kg/m2)
Mean (SD)
23.1 (2.6)
22.6 (2.9)
23.4 (2.1)
23.2 (2.8)
Figure. Absolute changes of the overall cohort of 1,25OH2D,
24,25OH2D, PTH, FGF-23, BALP, CTX-I, PINP, Dkk-1 and sclerostin
* p<0.05 with respect to baseline. Error bars show standard deviation.
P605
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN BONE HEALTH, AND OBESITY,
SARCOPENIA, AND SARCOPENIC OBESITY IN INDIAN
OLDER ADULTS
A. Gandham1, D. Scott2, M. P. Bonham1, B. Kulkarni3, S. Kinra4, M. M.
Cervo4, P. R. Ebeling1, A. Zengin1
1Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 2Deakin University,
Melbourne, Australia, 3Osmania University, Hyderabad, India, 4London
school of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Objective: Older adults with the comorbid sarcopenia and obesity,
sarcopenic obesity have poorer BMD compared with obese counter-
parts in primarily Caucasian populations, but studies in diverse pop-
ulations are currently unavailable. We investigated whether BMD
was associated with obesity, sarcopenia and sarcopenic obesity in
Indian adults.
Methods: 1057 adults aged >50 y were included. DXA measured fat
and lean mass and BMD at the hip, spine and whole body. Obesity
was defined by body fat percentage (cut points- men: >25%, wom-
en: >35%); sarcopenia was defined using the revised Asian Working
Group for Sarcopenia definition with low hand grip strength (men:
<28 kg, women: <18 kg) and appendicular lean mass index (ALMI)
(men: <7.0 kg/m2, women: <5.4 kg/m2). Participants were classified
into four groups as having one of the following: nonsarcopenic
nonobesity (NSNO), obesity alone, sarcopenia alone or sarcopenic
obesity. Linear regression analyses were performed and adjusted for
confounders including age, sex and smoking status; data are pre-
sented as β-coefficients and 95% confidence intervals.
Results: Older adults with sarcopenia alone had significantly lower
hip BMD (-0.069; -0.086, -0.051) and whole body BMD (-0.039; -
0.061, -0.017) compared with those with NSNO, while those with
sarcopenic obesity had significantly lower spine BMD vs. obesity
alone and NSNO groups, after adjustments (all p<0.05). Although
older adults with obesity had higher hip BMD (0.026; 0.007, 0.045),
they had lower whole body BMD (-0.039; -0.061, -0.017) compared
to the NSNO group, after adjustments.
Conclusion: Sarcopenic obesity is associated with poorer bone
health in Indian older adults compared to those with obesity and
NSNO. The protective effect of obesity maintaining BMD appears
to be lost in Indian older adults with comorbid sarcopenia.
S304
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P606
THE IMPACT OF PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
FOR OLDER ADULTS WITH SARCOPENIA: A SYSTEMATIC
REVIEW OF RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS
A. L. Lee1, C. McArthur2, H. A. A. Alrob1, G. I. Ioannidis1, J. D. A.
Adachi1, L. T. Thabane1, J. L. Lee1, A. P. Papaioannou1
1McMaster University, Hamilton, 2Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada
Objective: Sarcopenia is a common clinical syndrome that can increase
risk of adverse outcomes such as falls or fractures in older adults.
Previous studies have shown that exercise or nutritional supplements
can be an effective treatment for older adults with sarcopenia. However,
the effect of pharmacological treatment on muscle mass, muscle strength,
and physical function for older adults with sarcopenia is uncertain. The
aim of this study is to investigate the effect of pharmacological interven-
tions on muscle mass, muscle strength, and physical function for older
adults with sarcopenia.
Methods: We systematically searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the
Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials from inception to
February 2019 to identify randomized controlled studies (RCTs) exam-
ining the effects of pharmacological interventions on muscle mass, mus-
cle strength, and physical function in older adults aged 65 years or older
with sarcopenia.
Results: We screened a total of 2166 records and included six RCTs that
investigated the effects of pharmacological interventions on muscle mass,
muscle strength, and physical function in older adults with sarcopenia.
Very low quality evidence suggests that vitamin D supplementation for 6
months may improve muscle mass as measured by Appendicular Skeletal
Muscle mass in vitamin D deficient presarcopenic older patients (mean
difference: 5.31 kg, 95%CI: 3.60 to 7.02). However, very low to low
quality evidence suggests that there is no statistically significant change
in muscle mass, muscle strength or quality of life with pharmacological
treatment including testosterone, vitamin D, selective androgen receptor
modulator, or angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors at 5 and 6
months.
Conclusions: Our systematic review found pharmacological interven-
tions might not improve muscle mass, muscle strength and physical func-
tion for older adults with sarcopenia, although the quality of the evidence
is very low. Future high quality trials are required to establish the effects
of pharmacological treatment for people with sarcopenia.
P607
PERFORMANCE OF THREE SCREENING QUESTIONNAIRES
TO ASSESS VITAMIN D STATUS IN THE GENERAL
POPULATION
C. Shadouh1, O. Bruyère2, E. Cavalier3
1WHO Collaboration Center for Public Health Aspects of Musculo-
skeletal Health and Ageing, University of Liège, 2University of Liège,
Division of Public Health, Epidemiology and Health Economics,
3Clinical Chemistry Dept., University Hospital of Liège, Liège, Belgium
Objective: Vitamin D deficiency is a major public health problem and
should be detected. To date, the only reliable test to determine vitamin D
status is a blood test for 25-hydroxyvitamin D determination, but this
should not be used as a screening tool, especially in healthy subjects.
Our objective is to evaluate the performance of several predictive simple,
rapid, inexpensive questionnaires of vitamin D status and to determine
whether they could be an effective alternative to blood testing in a general
population.
Methods: This is a cross-sectional study involving a sample of 81 sub-
jects recruited from the staff of the CHU and University of Liege,
Belgium (50.6°N). All participants were asked to answer three question-
naires aimed to assess the vitamin D status. Blood sample was collected
and serum 25(OH)D was measured by LCMS/MS and served as the
reference. ROC curve analysis as well as sensitivity, specificity, positive
and negative predictive values were determined for each questionnaire.
Sensitivity analysis was performed on a subsample of nonsupplemented
subjects only.
Results: 38.3% of the total sample was vitamin D deficient with a
serum 25(OH)D level below 20 ng/mL and 50.6% of subjects were
taking vitamin D supplementation. The median age was 35.0 [28.0 -
43.0] years and the mean BMI was 24.4±3.54 kg/m². Analyses on
the whole sample showed that questionnaire 1, 2 and 3 had a sen-
sitivity of 87.1%, 83.9%, 100%, a specificity of 78.0%, 20.0%,
4.00%, a positive predictive value of 71.1%, 39.4%, 39.2% and
negative predictive value of 90.7%, 66.7%, 100%, respectively.
Sensitivity analysis showed that questionnaire 1, 2 and 3 had a
sensitivity of 96.4%, 82.1%, 100%, a specificity of 8.93%, 16.7%,
0.00%, a positive predictive value of 71.1%, 69.7%, 70.0% and
negative predictive value of 50.0%, 28.6%, respectively.
Conclusion: This study could not demonstrate the effectiveness of ques-
tionnaires in predicting vitamin D status in a population of healthy adults.
P608
THE ROLE OF LOW FREQUENCY EXTRACORPOREAL
SHOCKWAVE THERAPY IN CALCANEAL EXOSTOSIS
I.-R. Marcu1, V. D. Caimac1, D. D. Dop1, C. O. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Calcaneal exostosis is a spinal bone proliferation on the plan-
tar surface of the calcaneus bone. The present study aimed to determine
the efficacy and safety of shockwave therapy (SWT) in patients with
calcaneal exostosis.
Methods: We performed a prospective observational study on a group of
60 patients with the diagnosis of calcaneal exostosis established following
the radiological examination, who performed the outpatient physical
treatment. All patients included in the study received 2000 shocks 2 or
3 times a week, a total of 5 sessions, at a pressure of 3-4 bar and at a
frequency of 10-15 Hz. We used the following evaluation models: morn-
ing pain on the first step and pressure on the heel were evaluated using a
visually analogous scale (VAS), the comfortable walking time was also
recorded, the score Roles and Maudsley, the evaluation of the quality of
life were also recorded. The assessment of patients was performed at the
inclusion in the study and after 14 d of treatment.
Results: VAS mean scores were statistically significantly reduced after
rehabilitation treatment from 7.8±0.4 at baseline to 2.1±0.8 at 14 d.
Regarding the evaluation of the comfortable walking duration, the pa-
tients started from an average comfortable walking duration of 2 h for 51
patients (85%) and 1 h for 9 patients (15%), which shows a statistically
significant decrease compared to the initial values (p<0.001). For the
Roles and Maudsley score, the starting value was 4 for both women
and men; after 15 d of treatment 85% of patients reached a score of 1 or
2. The quality of life questionnaire shows that the end of the therapy
sessions with low energy shockwaves, weather sensitivity, pain, muscle
fatigue and sleep disorders decreased in almost all patients.
Conclusion: Extracorporeal SWT in patients with calcaneal exostosis has
the advantage of efficacy, safety and noninvasiveness. This therapy has
been shown to be effective in relieving pain and increasing patients’
quality of life.
P609
A SS O C I A TI O N B ET W E E N G A IT D E V I C E S A N D
REHABILITATION PROGRAM IN HIP OSTEOARTHRITIS
I.-R. Marcu1, V. D. Caimac1, D. D. Dop1, C. O. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: To determine the role of association between daily use of cane
and rehabilitation program in patients with hip osteoarthritis, using a
randomized, controlled trial.
S305
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: The study included two groups of patients (1- study group and
2- control group) either 32 patients, males and females, diagnosed with
hip osteoarthritis. The inclusion criteria were: hip pain score between 3-7
(on a 0-10 visual analogue scale- VAS), stable doses of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), no regular physical-kinetic exercise or
use of canes previous to the study. Each patient of the study group used
a gait device daily (cane) and was instructed in how to use the cane on the
contralateral side. The patients of the two groups followed the same
rehabilitation program. Kinetic program was prepared with paraffin
thermotherapy, massage with tonic and vasoactive effect on leg muscles
and analgesic electrotherapy (TENS, interferential currents). Physical and
kinetic treatment lasted 14 d.
The clinical and functional parameters assessed were pain, physical dys-
functions, disabilities, drugs consumption- NSAIDs, quality of life. We
used the following scales: hip pain in a VAS, Tinetti Gait Scale, Tinetti
Balance Scale, 36-Item Short Form Survey questionnaire (SF-36).
Results: The improvement of the pain score was 47.5% for group 1 and
38.4% for group 2, for physical dysfunctions- 30.2% for group 1 and
23.6% for group 2, for disabilities (gait disturbances)- 39.7% for group
1 vs. 31.5% for group 2; drug consumption (NSAIDs)- 45.4% for group 1
vs. 36.1 for group 2. The functional status evaluated using SF-36 ques-
tionnaire was improved with 43.8% for group 1 and 35.3% for group 2.
Conclusion: This study showed the effect of association between gait
devices and rehabilitation program at the patients with hip osteoarthritis in
improving clinical and functional parameters. We concluded that combi-
nation of gait devices and physical-kinetic program is more effective
compared to single use of the rehabilitation tools in patients with hip
osteoarthritis.
P610
MRI EVALUATION OF OSTEOCHONDRITIS DISSECANS OF
THE KNEE
A. C. Venter1, L. G. Daina1, I. Oswald1, F. L. Andronie-Cioara1, A.
Husar1, C. M. Daina1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania,
Objective: Osteochondritis dissecans is a subchondral focal infarction
limited to a small portion of the bone but may also include articular carti-
lage. It is a circumscribed aseptic necrosis with vascular etiology, but
repetitive or limited trauma also plays an important role. The disease oc-
curs frequently between 5-50 y with maximum incidence in adolescence,
in the weight-bearing joints: medial condyle of the femur, talus, tibial
plateau. Aim: MRI features of osteochondritis dissecans of the femur.
Methods: We evaluated 14 patients (9 males, 5 females, aged between
19-47 y) who underwent MRI examination of the knee in the Imaging
Dept. of the County Clinical Hospital in Oradea. The examination re-
vealed both articular cartilage lesions as well as subchondral lesions.
Results: The subchondral fracture associated with edema occurs
hyposignal in the T1-weighted sequences and the cartilage defect with
or without associated subchondral bone edema is visible on the fat-
saturated sequences. We grouped the patients in 4 stages following the
MRI examination, namely: in stage I - bone edema, in stage IIa - with
subchondral cyst formation, in stage IIb with incomplete separate
subchondral fragment; the lesions are considered stable. In stage III - fluid
can be seen around a partially detached osteochondral fragment, the le-
sions are considered unstable, in stage IV - the osteochondral fragment is
completely detached. In stage I we included 2 patients- 14%, in stages IIa
and IIb we included 4 patients- 28%, in stage III we included 5 patients-
36% and in stage IV we included 3 patients- 22%.
Conclusion: MRI examination of the knee plays an important role in the
evaluation of osteochondritis dissecans lesions providing excellent ana-
tomical details; evaluates cartilage thickness, signal changes inside the
cartilage, subchondral bone/bone cartilage interface as well as cartilage
repair tissue.
P611
EFFECTS OF AN EXERCISE PROGRAM ON IMPROVING
QUALITY OF LIFE AND FUNCTIONAL STATUS IN
OSTEOPOROTIC PATIENTS
I.-R. Marcu1, V. D. Caimac1, D. D. Dop1, C. M. Borcan2, C. O.
Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, 2Clinical Hospital of
Neuropsychiatry Craiova, Neurorehabilitation Clinic, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Exercise programs were proven to have a significant role on
decreasing back pain intensity and disability on osteoporotic patients. We
conducted a randomized controlled clinical trial to determine the effects
of physical exercises in reducing back pain, depression and improving
physical function and quality of life to these patients.
Methods: All patients were diagnosed with postmenopausal osteoporosis
using BMD evaluation and received bisphosphonates treatment for at
least 6 months. The study included 64 women randomly assigned to a
control group (32 patients) and an exercise group (32 patients). The pa-
tients in the control group received only bisphosphonates in stable doses.
The patients in the exercise group followed the drug antiresorptive ther-
apy and a standardized exercise program aimed to improve posture, spinal
mobility and to strengthen spinal extensors, abdominal muscles and lower
limbs muscles, exercises for improving gate and balance. The exercise
program was performed for approximatively one hour, three times/week,
6 weeks. The patients were assessed baseline and after 6 weeks, using the
following tools: a visual analogue scale for spinal pain (VAS), Beck
Depression Inventory and Quallefo-41 for measuring the quality of life
in patients with osteoporotic vertebral deformities.
Results: Spinal pain evaluated on a VAS reduced by 43.5% in the exer-
cise group and by only 12.6% in the control group after 6 weeks of
treatment. There also was a significant difference between groups regard-
ing Beck Depression Inventory, the exercise group showing an improve-
ment from 14.2 to 11.6 and the control group deteriorating from 13.9 to
14.3. The exercise group also showed significantly greater improvements
for Qualeffo-41 scores compared to the control group, especially on pain
and social function subscales. We also established a statistically signifi-
cant correlation between the improving of spinal pain score and Beck
Depression Inventory score in the exercise group patients.
Conclusion: The results support the benefits of a standardized exercise
program in the clinical management of patients with osteoporosis, by
reducing spinal pain, depression and improving their quality of life. The
exercise pain was well accepted by all patients and no adverse events
were reported.
P612
A PILOT STUDY OF THE EFFECT OF ARCH STIFFNESS ON
LOWER LIMB JOINT KINEMATICS DURING UNEXPECTED
GAIT TERMINATION
X. Z. Cen1, D. Sun1, I. Bíró2, Y. D. Gu1
1Faculty of Sports Science, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China, 2Faculty
of Engineering, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary
Objective: The efficacy of the arch stiffness index as a criterion to eval-
uate injury susceptibility is well documented; however, the effect of arch
stiffness on lower limb biomechanics, especially during gait termination,
is poorly understood. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate how arch
stiffness affects the kinematics of lower limb joints during unplanned gait
termination.
Methods: A total of 67 asymptomatic male participants (mean age: 22.7
±0.9) were recruited to complete the gait biomechanical tests. All were
classified by calculating the arch stiffness index using three-dimensional
arch morphological scanning and participated in unplanned gait termina-
tion tests to acquire kinematic data using a motion capture system. An
inverse kinematics algorithm was performed in Visual 3D software to
calculate the hip, knee, ankle, and metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint
S306
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
angles. Parameters were compared between stiff and flexible arches using
an independent-samples T-test.
Results: During gait termination, compared with the stiff arch, the sub-
jects with flexible arch had a significantly larger range of motion on the
frontal plane of the knee joint (p<0.001). The stiff arch group showed a
greater range of joint motion on the sagittal plane of the ankle joint
(p<0.001). On the frontal plane, the joint range of motion in the flexible
arch group was greater (p=0.044). For the MTP joints, the joint angle on
the frontal plane of the stiff arch group was significantly greater than that
of the flexible arch group (p<0.001).
Conclusion: The difference in biomechanical characteristics caused by
different arch stiffness was mainly concentrated in the distal joints.
During planned and unplanned gait termination, the arch needs to bear
and disperse the impact load transmitted to the foot, and the flexible arch
is more likely to be compressed to reduce the height of the medial longi-
tudinal arch, resulting in the limited windlass mechanism. These results
may add additional insights into the arch function and injury susceptibil-
ity during gait termination.
P613
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AND CHONDROPROTECTIVE
EFFECTS OF CELECOXIB AND GLUCOSAMINE SULFATE
ON HUMAN OSTEOARTHRITIC CHONDROCYTES
EXPOSED TO IL-1β
S. Cheleschi1, S. Tenti1, A. Fioravanti1
1Rheumatology Unit, Dept. of Medicine, Surgery and Neuroscience,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Policlinico Le Scotte, Siena,
Italy
Objective: To investigate the possible anti-inflammatory and
chondroprotective effects of a combination of celecoxib and glucosamine
sulfate (GS), currently included among the pharmacological strategies for
osteoarthritis (OA) management, in human OA chondrocytes exposed to
the negative stimulus of IL-1β. The mechanism of action underlying their
repairing activities was also explored.
Methods: Chondrocytes were treated with celecoxib (1.85 μM) and GS
(9 μM), alone or in combination, for 24 h and 48 h, in presence of IL-1β
(10 ng/mL). After treatment, the gene expression and supernatant release
of the main pro-inflammatory cytokines, metalloproteinases (MMPs),
and type II collagen (Col2a1) were assessed by qRT-PCR and ELISA.
Apoptosis and mitochondrial superoxide production were measured by
flow cytometry, the anti-apoptotic marker, B-cell lymphoma (BCL)2, and
the major antioxidant enzymes by qRT-PCR. The activation of NF-κB
was examined analyzing p50 subunit by western blot. The implication of
the pathway in celecoxib and GS-mediated effects was assessed by the
use of a specific NF-kB inhibitor (BAY-11-7082, 2 h preincubation).
Results: Celecoxib and GS, tested alone or coincubated with IL-1β,
significantly reduced the gene expression and supernatant release of cy-
clooxygenase 2, prostaglandin E2, IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α, MMP-1, MMP-
3, MMP-13, while increased Col2a1, in comparison to basal condition or
IL-1β stimulus. Both drugs also reduced apoptosis and superoxide pro-
duction, the transcriptional levels of superoxide dismutase, catalase, nu-
clear factor erythroid 2, increased BCL2 and limited p50 NF-κB nuclear
translocation. The combination of celecoxib and GS demonstrated a more
significant inhibitory effect on IL-1β stimulus on inflammation, apopto-
sis, oxidative stress and cartilage turnover, than was observed by each
treatment alone. Furthermore, celecoxib and GS effects were potentiated
by the preincubation of the cells with BAY-11-7082.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrated the synergistic effect of celecoxib
and GS on OA chondrocytes metabolism, apoptosis and oxidative stress,
probably through the modulation of NF-κB signaling pathway; these
findings may provide a powerful rationale for the combined use of
celecoxib and GS for the treatment of OA.
P614
DIVERSIFIED RISK FACTORS FOR RECURRENT
FRACTURES, FALLS, AND MORTALITY AMONG PATIENTS
WITH FRAGILITY FRACTURES PARTICIPATING IN A
FRACTURE LIAISON SERVICE PROGRAM
C. Chia-Ter1, Y. Rong-Sen2, H. Wei-Jia3, C. Ding-Cheng4
1Dept. of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Bei-
Hu Branch, Taipei, 2Dept. of Orthopedics, National Taiwan University
Hospital, Taipei, 3Dept. of Geriatrics & Gerontology, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, 4Superintendent Office, National Taiwan
University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan
Objective: Significant gap exists regarding the care for patients with
fragility fracture and osteoporosis, especially for different outcomes.
We examined the influences of lifestyle interventions on risk factors of
1-y mortality, falls, and recurrent fractures of our fracture liaison service
(FLS) program participants.
Methods: Totally 600 patients participated in our FLS program, whose
protocol was adapted from the 13 best practice framework (BPF) stan-
dards published by the International Osteoporosis Foundation. We per-
formed baseline assessments and provided follow-up care for 1 year,
followed by classifying the entire cohort into 4 groups: those without
lifestyle interventions from baseline to 1-y (Group 1), without interven-
tions at baseline but with interventions at 1-y (Group 2), with interven-
tions at baseline but without intervention at 1-y (Group 3), and with
interventions throughout the study period (Group 4). We compared risk
factors for recurrent fractures, falls, and mortality among different cate-
gories of lifestyle interventions including protein, calcium, vitamin D3
supplementation, and exercise groups, using univariate and Cox propor-
tional hazard regressions.
Results: The mean age of participants in our cohort was 77.5±10.5 y,
with 72% female. The 1-y mortality and incidence of fall, recurrent frac-
tures were 9.5%, 33.2%, and 3.0%, respectively. Cox regression revealed
that for exercise intervention, group 4 exhibited a significantly lower risk
of mortality (odds ratio 0.201, p<0.001), while group 3 had a lower risk of
fall (odds ratio 0.466, p=0.026) compared to group 1.For protein supple-
ment and calcium supplement interventions, groups 2 (odds ratio 0.83,
p=0.003) and 4 (odds ratio 0.5, p<0.001) were both associated with a
lower risk of mortality but remained comparable regarding other end-
points. For vitD3 supplement intervention, groups 2 (odds ratio 0.084,
p<0.001) and 4 (odds ratio 0.21, p<0.001) exhibited a significantly lower
risk of mortality but higher risk of fall (groups 2 odds ratio 1.855,
p=0.023; groups 3 odds ratio2.027, p=0.039; group 4 odds ratio
1.803,p=0.022) compared to group 1.
Conclusion: In this study, we identified that variations of different com-
binations of lifestyle interventions could be important risk factors for
incident falls, recurrent fractures, and mortality among FLS participants.
P615
KNEE SYNOVITIS AS PROGRESSION FACTOR OF
OSTEOARTHRITIS IN PATIENTS WITH SHORTER DISEASE
DURATION
N. Kashevarova1, E. Taskina1, D. Kusevich1, L. Alekseeva1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Assessment of relationship between knee synovitis and pro-
gression risk of OA in patients with <5-y disease duration at 5-y prospec-
tive study.
Methods: At 5-y study enrolled 110 females with primary knee OA
(according to ACR criteria), 52/110 had <5-y disease duration (mean
age 59.11±8.95, mean disease duration 3.46±1.32). All patients had case
report form and were checked by knee ultrasound (US) and X-ray (K-L
classification). There are 22(42.3%) patients from 52 had 1 stage,
24(46.2%) had 2 stage, and 6(11.5%) had 3 stage at baseline.
S307
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: At 5-y follow-up period, the progression of knee OA was de-
tected 1st group with progression by X-ray stage increasing (n=14) and
2nd no progression group (n=38). In both groups’ patients were similar by
ages (58.29±7.68 vs. 56.05±8.74 y.o., р>0.05) and disease duration (3.43
±1.34 vs. 3.47±1.33 y, р>0.05). However, at 1st group knee pain while
walking was more intensive (60.36±18.33 vs. 48.71±17.81 mm,
р=0.043), higher BMI (34.45±4.60 vs. 28.92±4.92 kg/m², р=0.001) and
more often was diagnosed synovitis by US (57.1% vs. 18.4%, RR=3.1,
95%CI 1.38-6.96, р=0.009). After 5-y (Visit 2) at 1st group patients had
more intensive knee pain while walking (69.64±18.49 vs. 55.76±12.76,
р=0.003), higher BMI (35.74±5.83 vs. 30.64±4.64, р=0.002), more often
was diagnosed synovitis by US (50 vs. 13.2%, RR=3.8 (95%CI 1.4-10.0),
р=0.009), statistically significant differences were established. In patients
from 1st group more often was found out the irregularity of articular
cartilage surface and heterogeneity - 100 vs. 50.5% RR=1.6 (95%Cl
1.2-2.1), р=0.003) and 85.7 vs. 42.1%, RR=2.0 (95%Cl 1.3-3.1),
р=0.005), respectively. The Spearman test was used to analyze X-ray
stage and OA progression associated factors. We found that most impor-
tant factors were knee pain while walking (R=0.34, p<0.05), BMI
(R=0.46, p<0.01) and knee synovitis by US (R=0.41, p<0.01). After
multiple analysis was performed that significant factor of progression in
knee OA is synovitis (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Synovitis was more often identified in patients with next
progression of knee OA both at baseline and after 5-y follow up period.
It is significance factor of knee OA progression.
P616
UNDERTREATMENT OF HIP FRAGILITY FRACTURES IN
THE PRIMARY CARE SETTING: A 5-YEAR NATIONWIDE
PERSPECTIVE FROM PORTUGAL
V. Trindade Pedrosa1, B. Oliveira Pinto1, R. Baptista Leite2, M. Castro
Guimarães1, F. C. Araújo3
1Unidade de Saúde Familiar Kosmus, 2Unidade de Saúde Familiar São
Martinho de Alcabideche, 3Hospital de Sant'Ana - Santa Casa da
Misericórdia de Lisboa, Cascais, Portugal
Objective: To determine the treatment rate following hip fractures in the
Primary Health Care (PHC) setting in Portugal from 2016-2020 and to
characterize prescription patterns of antiosteoporotic drugs in this context.
Methods: We conducted an observational, cross-sectional, retrospective
study using data from the PHC database Bilhete de Identidade - Cuidados
de Saúde Primários (BI-CSP). BI-CSP is a national primary care database
(except Madeira and the Azores) presenting information on demograph-
ics, health indicators, drug prescription and primary care units’ manage-
ment and organization. Grouped and anonymized data on any
prespecified variable over a period of time (for instance, diagnosis or
treatment) can be obtained through the application of filters. The classi-
fication tool used is the International Classification of Primary Care, 2nd
Edition. We included in our study all individuals registered in the PHC in
Portugal who sustained a hip fracture after the age of 50 y. Treatment
rates were determined after considering any prescription of an anti-
osteoporotic drug to these patients in the PHC, from 2016 (BI-CSP
inception) to 2020. The frequency of prescription for each type of drug
was also assessed. All outcomes of interest were extracted to a data
extraction sheet created for this purpose. Descriptive statistics were gen-
erated using Microsoft Office ExcelⓇ2016. This study was approved by
the local ethics committee.
Results: We identified a total of 44725 hip fractures in Portugal between
2016-2020, 33668 (75.3%) in female patients. Most hip fractures were
recorded in the North- (17387) and Lisbon- (14353) Regional Health
Administrations (RHA). Only 6282 (14.0%) patients were treated with
antiosteoporotic therapies following hip fracture. The RHA with the
highest treatment rate was the Algarve (15.2%) and the lowest was
Alentejo (10.9%). National and regional prescription patterns are shown
in Table 1. Bisphosphonates were the most frequently used therapies,
particularly alendronic acid (66.7%), ibandronic acid (18.8%) and zole-
dronic acid (8.7%). Denosumab, raloxifene and teriparatide were pre-
scribed by family physicians in 5.1%, 1.1% and 1.0% of patients after
hip fracture.
Conclusion: Only a minority of patients received anti-osteoporotic treat-
ment following fragility hip fractures in the primary care setting in
Portugal. The most frequently used therapies were, by far,
bisphosphonates namely alendronic acid.
Disclosure: Filipe C. Araújo has received speaker fees from Novartis and
Amgen.
S308
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P617
RISK FACTORS OF OSTEOPOROSIS AND CRITERIA FOR
HIGH RISK OF FRACTURES IN PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC
HEART FAILURE BEFORE AND AFTER HEART
TRANSPLANTATION
V. A. Sujayeva1, V. V. Spiryna1, E. V. Rudenka2, O. V. Koshlataya1, T.
A. Dubovik1, N. A. Vasilyeva3
1Republican Scientific and Practical Center "Cardiology", 2Belarusian
State Medical University, 3Republican Centre for Medical
Rehabilitation and Balneotherapy, Minsk, Belarus
Objective: To assess risk factors of osteoporosis (OP) and determine
criteria of high risk of fractures in patients with chronic heart failure
(CHF) before and after heart transplantation (HT).
Methods: 95 patients with CHF before and after HT (mean age 53.8±9.5
y) were enrolled. The period after HT ranged from 0-26 months (mean 8.5
±8.9 months). After HT patients received mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
1-1.5 g/d, tacrolimus with maintenance of target concentration, methyl-
prednisolone 250 mg intravenously I-II days, from day III oral predniso-
lone 1 mg/kg/d for 4 weeks, with further dose reduction until 0.1 mg/kg/d
for 3 months. DXA, vertebral morphometry, spine X-ray were performed
in 80 subjects. 10-y fracture probability was calculated using FRAX scale
(Fracture Risk Assessment Tool). Laboratory diagnostics included lipid
spectrum, total and ionized calcium, phosphorus, 25-hydroxyvitamin D,
PTH, osteocalcin, β-CrossLaps.
Results: According to DXA normal BMD was observed in 35 (44%),
osteopenia in 3 (3%), osteoporosis in 42 (53%) patients. Vertebral frac-
tures were diagnosed in 18 (23%) of 80 patients with CHF before and
after HT. Vertebral fractures in 10 (56%) out 18 patients developed with
normal BMD. The patients with CHF before and after HT had hypocal-
cemia (20.5%), hyperparathyroidism (50.7%), as well as hypovitaminosis
D in 85% of all patients. Increased level of bone resorption markers β-
CrossLaps were observed in 1/3 of the examined patients. Statistically
significant positive relationship was found between level of low density
lipoproteins and β-CrossLaps, suggesting that bone resorption was higher
in patients with high LDL.
Conclusion: We found that traditional risk factors of OP (hypertension,
diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease) in the group of patients with CHF
before and after HT were with the same frequency in persons with oste-
oporosis and in patients with normal BMD. The main risk factors of
osteoporosis in patients with CHF before and after HT were: development
of a graft rejection reaction in the postoperative period, low dose of
mycophenolate mofetil (<1500 mg/d), plasma tacrolimus concentration
>10 mg/ml, no loop diuretics, no statins.
P618
PREDICTIVE FACTORS OF FRAGILITY FRACTURES:
ASSESSMENT OF PATIENTS OBSERVED AT EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT FOR FRACTURES
C. Soares1, S. Azevedo1, H. Parente1, F. Guimarães1, E. Costa2, J.
Rodrigues1, D. Peixoto1, J. Costa1, F. Teixeira1, C. Afonso1, D. Faria1
1ULSAM, Ponte de Lima, 2Hospital de Braga, Braga, Portugal
Objective: To assess the predictive factors for fragility fractures (FF).
Methods: Retrospective monocentric study that included patients with
FF (wrist, hip and vertebrae), observed at the emergency department (ED)
in a tertiary center between 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2018. The
search for fractures was performed through ICD9 codes and clinical data
was collected. We excluded totally dependent patients or in palliative
care, peri-prosthetic fractures and patients with osteometabolic diseases
other than osteoporosis. We identified 1673 FF and after calculating a
representative sample (90%CI) 457 FF were included. To identify pre-
dictors of FF we performed a multivariate analysis including variables
with a significant association in univariate analysis and those with clinical
relevance. SPSS was used for statistical analysis and significance level
was defined as 2-sided p<0.05.
Results: 172 patients with hip fracture, 173 with wrist fracture and 112
with vertebral fracture were included. Most patients were women (79.9%)
with a mean age of 77.6 (SD=10.3) years old at the time of the fracture.
16% of patients had a previous BMD test and 7.4% were on
antiosteoporotic drugs. We found an association between the occurrence
of a FF and previous visits to the ED due to falls (p<0.001), number of
comorbidities (p=0.006), previous diagnosis of chronic pulmonary dis-
ease (p=0.002), hematologic disease (p=0.005) or malignancy (p=0.024)
and previous diagnosis of osteoporosis based on BMD test (p=0.036). No
associations were found between the number or type of medication taken
daily, previous fractures and their localization nor the presence of other
specific comorbidities other than those mentioned above. Multivariate
analysis showed that previous visits to the ED due to falls (p=0.002)
and malignancy (p=0.026) remained associated with the occurrence of
new FF after the adjustment for comorbidities, smoking, alcoholism and
corticosteroid therapy.
Conclusion: Our study showed that previous visits to the ED due to falls
and diagnosis of malignancy are independent predictors of FF. In the
presence of these comorbidities screening for osteoporosis must be con-
sidered and the need for treatment should be assessed.
P619
ADIPOSE TISSUE-DERIVED MESENCHYMAL STEM CELLS
AS BIOASSAY TO CLEARLY UNDERSTAND THE EFFECTS
OF CANNABINOIDS ON BONE MINERALIZATION
G. Palmini1, S. Donati1, C. Romagnoli1, F. Giusti1, F. Miglietta1, C.
Aurilia1, G. Galli1, T. Iantomasi1, P. Chiarugi1, M. L. Brandi2
1Dept. of Experimental & Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, 2Fondazione Italiana Ricerca sulle Malattie dell’Osso (FIRMO
Onlus), Florence, Italy
Objective: To date, we are still not sure of the role of cannabinoids and of
endocannabinoids system on several physiological processes, including
bone mineralization. Therefore, in this study we developed a bioassay to
evaluate the role of the endocannabinoid system and anandamide (AEA)
in osteoblastogenesis.
Methods: Adipose-tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells
(preadipocytes (PA)) are able to differentiate in several cellular lineages,
and in particular to differentiate into osteoblasts, producing alkaline phos-
phatase (ALP), collagen, osteocalcin and hydroxyapatite (HA) deposits.
To start studying the effects/role of the endocannabinoid system on the
mineralization process we have evaluated the in vitro effects of a range of
AEA concentrations on ALP activity and mineralization, of three primary
PA lines.
Results: For the first time we have observed that all the tested AEA
concentrations inducing a significant increase of ALP activity as well as
an equal increase in the production of HA deposits during in vitro oste-
ogenic differentiation.
Conclusion: For the first time, thanks to the established bioassay of PA
lines, we reported that our findings indicate that cannabinoids and the
endocannabinoid system play an important role in supporting bone min-
eralization. In relation to the obtained results, we are currently evaluating
not only the expression levels of osteogenic marker genes and of the
endocannabinoid system genes, but also the modulation of osteogenic
microRNAs (miRNAs) during in vitro osteoinduction with the several
concentrations of AEA. After that, we will proceed to evaluate the role
of other cannabinoids which are important phytocomponents of Cannabis
sativa. The main aim of all these future perspectives is to clarify the role
of cannabinoids on mineralization, which is still unknown due to the lack
of valid human in vitro models, but also to identify new natural compo-
nents of cannabis that may in future, thanks to the results obtained in these
studies, play a role in the regeneration of bone tissue in pathological
states, such as osteoporosis.
S309
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Acknowledgements: Supported by Fondazione Ente Cassa di Risparmio
di Firenze and by FIRMO Onlus.
P620
C A R D I O V A S C U L A R R I S K I N P A T I E N T S W I T H
OSTEOARTHRITIS: RESULTS OF THE ALL-UKRAINIAN
STUDY “PARTNER”
O. Iaremenko1, O. Volodko2, N. Hrechanyk3, L. Vedenkina4, N.
Ahafonova5, S. Brusentseva6, H. Doroshenko7, M. Komkina1
1Bogomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, 2Rivne City Hospital
#2, Rivne, 3Dnipro Regional Clinical Hospital I.I. Mechnikov, Dnipro,
4Poltava Regional Clinical Hospital M.V. Sklifosovsky, Poltava, 5Kryvyi
Rih City Hospital #8, Kryvyi Rih, 6Kryvyi Rih City Hospital #9, Kryvyi
Rih, 7Kharkiv City Outpatient Clinic #6, Kharkiv, Ukraine
Objective: Osteoarthritis (OA) is extremely common in adults aged 60
and over and predicts cardiovascular diseases (CVD) [1]. 38% of people
with OA have CVD compared to 9% of people without OA [2]. There are
no studies on the prevalence of CVD among patients with OA in Ukraine.
The aim of the study "PARTNER" was to study the prevalence of car-
diovascular risk in patients with OA.
Methods: The multicenter PARTNER study (Prevalence of cardiovascu-
lar risk in newly diagnosed primary osteoarthritis patients) included 4769
patients with newly diagnosed OA who consulted medical center doctors
in 22 regions of Ukraine in August 2019 - March 2020.
Results: Full data were collected from 3936 patients, including 65.9%
women and 50% patients aged 50-59 y. A significant number of these
patients (2946 - 75%) even without the calculation of SCORE were clas-
sified as people with high or very high risk of cardiovascular complica-
tions, as they already had atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (55%),
diabetes mellitus (21%), very high levels of blood pressure (15%) and/or
cholesterol and chronic kidney disease (5%). According to the results of
the SCORE calculation, we identified another 127 patients with very high
cardiovascular risk. Total number of OA patients with high and very high
cardiovascular risk reached 3073 (78%). So patients with newly diag-
nosed primary OA in Ukraine are much more likely to have cardiovas-
cular pathology compared to data from other countries.
Conclusion: Among patients with newly diagnosed primary OA in
Ukraine there is a significant prevalence of cardiovascular pathology
and a high risk of developing serious cardiovascular events, according
to the results of the "PARTNER" study. This must be taken into account
when choosing NSAIDs in such patients especially when long-term ther-
apy is required.
References:
1.
Veronese N, et al. J Nutr Health Aging 2018;22:371.
2.
Hall AJ, et al. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2016;23:938.
P621
ORTHOGERIATRIC PATIENT BLOOD MANAGEMENT
IMPROVES CLINICAL OUTCOMES: PRELIMINARY
RESULTS FROM A CLINICAL OBSERVATIONAL STUDY
M. Ferracci1, C. Panara1, M. Baroni1, L. Parretti1, A. Villa2, M.
Marchesi3, N. Albi3, G. Rinonapoli4, V. Boccardi1, A. Caraffa4, P.
Mecocci1, C. Ruggiero1
1Geriatric & Orthogeriatric Unit, SM Misericordia Hospital, 2Dept. of
Clinical Pathology, SM Misericordia Hospital, 3Regional Blood Center,
Immunotransfusion Service, SM Misericordia Hospital, 4Orthopedic &
Traumatologic Unit, SM Misericordia Hospital, Perugia, Italy
Objective: Anemia is a common condition among orthogeriatric patients
leading to RBC transfusions and poor outcomes. Compared to usual care
(UC), we evaluated the impact of a patient blood management (PBM) on
the transfusion rate, haemoglobin (Hb) levels at discharge and 1-month
follow-up and their correlation with functional outcomes.
Methods: Prospective observational clinical study with historical con-
trols conducted in a high volume trauma center, evaluating orthogeriatric
patients aged ≥65 y with hip fracture. The PBM group includes patients
who received ferric carboxymaltose (FCM) in combination with folic
acid and vitamin B12. The UC group includes patients who had not
undergone treatment with any component of the triple therapy. Main
outcomes are Hb levels at discharges and at 1-month follow-up visit,
RBC untis transfused over the hospital stay, and length of hospital stay.
Both groups received orthogeriatric comanagement during the hospital
stay, then orthopaedic and geriatric assessment at 1-month follow-up.
Results: Overall, 419 patients were included: 215 in the PBM group and
204 in the UC group. Groups were homogeneous with regard of age,
prefracture comorbidities, and polypharmacy, in both groups women
were predominant. The majority of fractures were trochanteric and fem-
oral neck types. Compared to patients belonging to UC group, those in the
PBM group had higher Hb levels both at discharge (p=0.0329) and at 1-
month follow-up visit (p=0.0009), and tended to use lower RBC units
during hospital stay. PBM group experiences similar length of hospital
stay as compared with UC group. Hb levels were positively associated
with pre-fracture functional state (p=0.014); a tendency was confirmed
between higher Hb levels and functional recovery at 1 month-follow-up
(p=0.065).
Conclusion: The PBM in the orthogeriatric setting may improve patients’
clinical outcomes after hospital stay and until 1 month from surgery by
possibly reducing the healthcare burden.
P622
ASSOCIATIONS OF MARKERS OF ADIPOSITY AND
INFLAMMATION WITH BONE PHENOTYPE: RESULTS FROM
THEMRCNATIONALSURVEYOFHEALTHANDDEVELOPMENT
R. Durdin1, C. Parsons2, D. Kuh3, E. M. Dennison1, R. Cooper4, C.
Cooper1, K. A. Ward1
1MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton and
NIHR Southampton BRC, Southampton, 2MRC Lifecourse
Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, 3MRC
Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing, University College London,
London, 4Musculoskeletal Science and Sports Medicine Research
Centre, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK
Objective: To investigate associations of IL-6, adiponectin and leptin
with DXA and pQCT-measured bone phenotypes at age 60-64 y.
Methods: The MRC National Survey of Health and Development
(NSHD) is a prospective birth cohort study; 766 men and 820 women
in these cross-sectional analyses had DXA (total hip, spine, whole body
areal BMD (aBMD)) and pQCT scans (radius: 4% (total and trabecular
volumetric BMD (vBMD)) and 50% (cortical vBMD, medullary area)
sites) at age 60-64 y. Sex-stratified multiple linear regression was used to
determine associations between standardised inflammatory markers
(log(IL-6) and adiponectin) and bone, adjusted for sex-specific fat mass
residuals (the residual of fat mass after adjustment for lean mass and
height). For leptin, to avoid multicolinearity, leptin residuals were used
(the residual of log(leptin) after adjustment for fat mass and height).
Results are presented as standardised beta (95%CI); beta is standard de-
viation (SD) change in outcome per SD increase in inflammatory marker.
Results: IL-6 was not associated with aBMD in men, and in women there
were positive associations (total hip: 0.09(0.02,0.17)). IL-6 was negative-
ly associated with total vBMD in men (-0.09(-0.17,-0.01)) and positively
associated in women (0.10(0.02,0.18)). Leptin residuals were not associ-
ated with aBMD in men, and in women associations existed at the total
hip only (0.08(0.01,0.15)). Leptin residuals were positively associated
with cortical vBMD (men: 0.10(0.01,0.18); women: 0.11(0.03,0.19))
S310
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
and negatively associated with medullary area (men: -0.10(-0.18,-0.01);
women: -0.14(-0.21,-0.06)) in men and women. In men and women,
adiponectin was negatively associated with aBMD at all sites (total hip
men and women: -0.21(-0.28,-0.14)) and with trabecular vBMD (men: -
0.16(-0.24,-0.09); women: -0.17(-0.25,-0.09)). In women, adiponectin
was associated with cortical vBMD (-0.11(-0.19,-0.03)) and total
vBMD (-0.19(-0.27,-0.11)).
Conclusion: Overall, these results highlight differing associations be-
tween different markers of inflammation and adiposity and bone. They
suggest that inflammaging may influence healthy bone ageing.
P623
ESTABLISHMENT OF A HUMAN PRIMARY CELL LINE
FROM ECTOPIC CALCIFICATION FROM A PATIENT WITH
TUMORAL CALCINOSIS WITH A NEW GALNT3 MUTATION
TO STUDY MINERALIZATION AND THE PRESENCE OF
STEM CELLS INSIDE THE LESION
G. Palmini1, G. Galli1, S. Donati1, F. Miglietta1, C. Aurilia1, F.
Franceschelli1, R. Zonefrati2, T. Iantomasi1, A. Franchi3, L. Masi4, G.
Beltrami5, M. L. Brandi2
1Dept. of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of
Florence, Florence, 2Fondazione Italiana Ricerca sulle Malattie dell’Osso
(FIRMO Onlus), Florence, 33Dept. of Translational Research and of New
Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, 4SOD
Malattie del Metabolismo Minerale e Osseo, AOU Careggi, Florence,
5Ortopedia Oncologica Pediatrica, AOU Careggi-AOU Meyer,
Florence, Italy
Objective: Tumoral calcinosis (TC) is characterized by ectopic calcifica-
tions which are lobulated, well demarcated and most frequently located in
the soft tissues of the periarticular regions. In this study we have estab-
lished a primary cell line from TC lesion from a patient with TC with a
new GALNT3 gene mutation to perform functional studies on the min-
eralization process and to evaluate the presence of a stem cell subpopu-
lation inside these lesions to understand the molecular and cellular mech-
anisms which lead to the progression of TC.
Methods: A tissue sample of TC ectopic calcification was collected at the
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, Florence. TC primary cell
culture, from the tissue sample of the calcification, has been set up after
enzymatic treatment and mechanical dispersion. Using an assay, which is
based on the capacity of cancer stem cells to grow in stressful conditions,
we have evaluated the capacity of the isolated primary TC line to form
spherical colonies.
Results: We have established a primary cell line of TC, marked as TC1
cell line for future functional studies on mineralization process. Since we
have hypothesized that the ectopic calcifications could present a core of
stem cells through the sphere formation assay we have tried to isolate this
cellular subpopulation. In these months we have observed the capacity of
TC1 line to form spherical colonies from which we have isolated a puta-
tive stem cell line of TC, called as TC1-SCs.
Conclusion: We have established a primary cell line directly from the
calcified soft-tissue lesion from a patient with TC due to a new GALNT3
mutation to proceed with functional studies on the mineralization process,
which are in progress. For the first time we have also observed the pres-
ence of stem cells inside the TC lesions. We are currently proceeding to
confirm the stem cell phenotype of the isolated TC1-SCs line, to study the
expression levels of osteogenic marker genes and of all the genes related
to the FGF23 pathway during osteogenic differentiation.
Acknowledgement: Supported by FIRMO Onlus.
P624
PHARMACY DISPENSING RECORDS FOR TOPICAL
DICLOFENAC AND CONCOMITANT MEDICINES IN
GERMANY: A RETROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF REAL-
WORLD DATA
D. Deutsch1, K. Fabrikant2, V. Sethi3, G. Shanga4, V. Rampartaap5, T.
Wilcox6, E. Csoke7
1GSK Consumer Healthcare, Munich, Germany, 2GSK Consumer
Healthcare, London, UK, 3GSK Consumer Healthcare, Singapore,
Singapore, 4GSK Consumer Healthcare, Warren, USA, 5GSK
Consumer Healthcare, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 6Evidera,
Wilmington, USA, 7Basel, Switzerland
Objective: To describe dispensing patterns of topical diclofenac alone or
with other medications in real world.
Methods: This retrospective, cross-sectional study characterizes the jour-
ney of patients buying topical diclofenac (Voltaren Schmerzgel or
Voltaren Schmerzgel forte) over a 12-month period (March 2019 -
February 2020) in Germany. Data was obtained from a large pharmacy
dispensing platform including data from 3,974,695 patients. Number of
dispensing per patient and number of treatment switches were measured
as the primary outcome. Percentage of patients that also fill prescriptions
of other medications such as for cardiovascular (CV), gastrointestinal
(GI), CV+ GI and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) taken concomitantly with topical diclofenac were measured
as secondary outcome.
Results: In Germany 95,085 patients were included in the analysis with at
least one purchase for topical diclofenac. The mean age of patients who
received topical diclofenac was 72 y and the majority were female (61%).
However, the largest age group for topical diclofenac dispensing was 75-
79 y (18%). Most of the patients received one dispensing of diclofenac
(70.8%), 15.4% patients received 2, 5.8% patients received 3, and 8.0%
received >3 dispensings of topical diclofenac during the 12-month period.
Most of the patients did not switch treatment irrespective of when topical
diclofenac was first dispensed - before Month 4 (77.3%) or before Month
7 (78.0%) of the year analysed. Patients who bought topical diclofenac,
frequently received it in combination with CV drugs (74.3.0%), GI drugs
(35.4%), or both (30.9%) during the same 12-month period. Hardly any
patients bought both topical and oral NSAIDs at the same time (0.95%).
Conclusion: This retrospective study shows that topical diclofenac was
mainly dispensed to older patients above 70 years and predominantly to
females. Based on repurchasing, data suggests strong users’ satisfaction
with their topical diclofenac (low percentage of switches). A high propor-
tion of patients buying topical diclofenac were also receiving drugs either
for CV or/and GI conditions.
Disclosures: Daniela Deutsch, Kate Fabrikant, Vidhu Sethi, Gilbert
Shanga, and Vishal Rampartaap are employees of GSK Consumer
Healthcare that sponsored the project. Emese Csoke was employee of
GSK Consumer Healthcare at time of project set-up. Teresa Wilcox pro-
vided data analysis.
P625
PATTERNS OF PLASMA ANTI-THYROID HORMONE
ANTIBODIES IN AUTOIMMUNE RHEUMATIC DISEASES
WITH THYROID LESION
O. A. Rusanova1, O. I. Emelyanova1, A. S. Trofimenko1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution "Research Institute of Clinical and
Experimental Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky", Волгоград, Russia
Objective: Comprehensive study of interrelations between endocrine and
immune functions over decades has provided a framework for paradigm
of functional cohesion of these two systems. New field of innate immu-
nity research regarding natural antibodies (NAbs), that can be produced
without antigen exposure and can provide with several physiological
functions, was developed. NAbs have considerable similarities with au-
toantibodies emerged in different systemic autoimmune disorders, and
rheumatic diseases, among others. Anti-thyroid antibodies, including
anti-T4 and anti-T3 autoantibodies, can also be referred to NAbs. Aim:
Assessment of anti-thyroid hormone antibody spectra in various rheumat-
ic diseases.
S311
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: The research was performed in accordance with the Helsinki
Declaration statements. 160 rheumatic patients with clinical signs of thy-
roid dysfunction and/or abnormal values of plasma TSH, T4, T3, or anti-
TPO were included in the study. Further clinical, ultrasound, and laboratory
survey was performed to establish type of thyroid lesion. Anti-T3 and anti-
T4 antibodies were measured by ELISA in plasma samples.
Results: High prevalence of thyroid lesions was demonstrated as for RA
(59.37%, n=95), SLE (26.26%, n=42), and systemic scleroderma
(14.37%, n=23). The most common types of thyroid involvement were
found to be hyperthyroidism and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Patients with
rheumatic diseases, including low TSH (34%) and low T3 (45%).
Occurrence of antithyroid antibodies in RA, in SLE, and systemic sclero-
derma was found to be 35%, 42%, and 28%, respectively.
Conclusion: Diagnosis and immunological typing of thyroid involve-
ment in systemic rheumatic diseases have major clinical importance as
a result of strong interplay between efficiency of immunotherapy and
altered thyroid function. Anti-T3 and anti-T4 antibodies can, in particular,
neutralize hormones from medicines, and, therefore, decrease effect of
basic treatment in autoimmune rheumatic diseases.
P626
THE NUMBER OF MEDICATIONS IS ASSOCIATED WITH
FRACTURES IN A POPULATION OF DIALYZED OLDER
PATIENTS WITH FRAILTY
D. Azzolino1, S. Vettoretti2, M. M. Poggi3, A. Soldati3, M. Cesari1
1Dept. of Clinical and Community Sciences, University of Milan,
Geriatric Unit, IRCCS Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri, 2Unit of
Nephrology, Dialysis and Kidney Transplantation, Fondazione IRCCS
Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico di Milano, 3Specialisation
School in Geriatrics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Objective: The use of multiple medications is frequently observed in
older people, especially in those with multimorbidity. The so-called poly-
pharmacy has been associated with adverse health-related outcomes. In
particular, among the most serious consequences of polypharmacy the
risk of falls and consequent fractures are well-established [1,2]. However,
it is noteworthy that the frailest individuals are often excluded from clin-
ical research, limiting the applicability of evidence to specific popula-
tions. Older persons with chronic kidney disease (CKD) undergoing he-
modialysis indeed represent a growing population of patients character-
ized by high vulnerability but still marginally studied. Aim of the study
was to explore the relationship between the number of prescriptions and
fractures in older patients with CKD undergoing hemodialysis.
Methods: A retrospective, cross-sectional study was conducted on data
coming from 107 older patients with CKD undergoing hemodialysis.
Sociodemographic, clinical, and biological data were recorded. A 24-
item Frailty Index (FI) was computed according to the model proposed
by Searle and colleagues. Unadjusted and adjusted logistic regression
models were performed to test the association of prescribed medications
with history of fractures.
Results: A total of 107 older patients undergoing hemodialysis were
included in the study. The mean patient age was 79.1 (standard deviation,
SD=7.7) y; 38 (35.5%) participants were women. The mean number of
prescribed medications was 9.94 (SD=3.87). The median FI was 0.25
(interquartile range, IQR=0.17-0.29). The number of prescribed medica-
tions was significantly associated with fractures (OR 1.18, 95%CI 1.06-
1.32, p = 0.003), even after adjustment for potential confounders (OR
1.16, 95%CI 1.03-1.30, p = 0.016).
Conclusion: The number of medications is associated with fractures in a
population of frail older people undergoing hemodialysis. Further studies
are needed to clarify the cause-effect relationship between polypharmacy
and fractures in older persons with severe CKD. If the number of medi-
cations will be confirmed as a risk factor for fracture, interventions based
on deprescribing will become essential in older persons with CKD un-
dergoing hemodialysis.
References:
1.
Lai S-W, et al. Medicine (Baltimore) 2010;89:295.
2.
Fried TR, et al. J Am Geriatr Soc 2014;62:2261.
Disclosure: MC has received honoraria from Nestlé Health Science for
presentations at scientific meetings and being part of expert advisory
boards.
P627
SCREENING FOR HIGH RISK OF FRACTURES IN PRIMARY
CARE IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
E. Gladkova1, O. Lesnyak1, V. Tanaev2, I. Zabezhinskaya2, M. Kolbin2,
Y. Ilyusin3
1North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov, 2City
Polyclinic №25 of the Nevsky District, 3Administration of the Nevsky
District, St. Petersburg, Russia
Objective: Osteoporosis constitutes a major public health problem,
through its association with age-related fractures, particularly of the hip,
vertebrae, distal forearm, and humerus. Early identification of high-risk
individuals for prevention is a priority in osteoporosis research. To reduce
the burden of osteoporotic fractures, we need a system of medical care
based on the interaction of primary care doctors and specialists.
Methods: All primary care physicians were trained in the calculation and
assessment of fracture risk using the FRAX calculator. FRAX was
assessed in men and women aged 40 and over, who applied for an ap-
pointment at the city polyclinic №25 of the Nevsky district of St.
Petersburg for any reason. If a high risk of fractures was detected, primary
care doctors prescribed antiosteoporotic therapy or referred the patient to
the rheumatologist. А high risk of fracture was identified if the FRAX
score above the threshold of therapeutic intervention, and in the case of an
suffered low-energy fracture.
Results: In 2017-2020, 11013 residents were calculated risk FRAX.
During this period, 2416 patients with a high risk of fractures were iden-
tified, which amounted to 31% of the total subject population. The inci-
dence of osteoporosis increased more 10 times in 2020. So, in 2017, it
was 28.3/100 000 of the population, and in 2020 - 316.7/100 000. As a
result of the study, a cohort was formed for follow-up.
Conclusion: Screening for osteoporosis using the FRAX calculator is a
simple and effective method for identifying patients at high risk of frac-
tures. Long-term follow up is needed to determine whether these initial
results are followed by actual reductions in osteoporotic fractures.
P628
VITAMIN D STATUS AND ASSOCIATED VDR GENE
POLYMORPHISM IN BELARUSIAN POSTMENOPAUSAL
WOMEN
P. Marozik1, E. Rudenka2, K. Kobets1, A. Rudenka3, V. Samokhovec3
1Institute of Genetics and Cytology of the National Academy of Sciences
of Belarus, 2Belarusian State Medical University, 3Belarusian Medical
Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Minsk, Belarus
Objective: Vitamin D plays an important role bone diseases prevention,
including osteoporosis (OP). The biological action of vitamin is realized
through its receptor, coded by VDR gene. Therefore, VDR gene polymor-
phism can influence vitamin D supplementation effectiveness. The ob-
jective of this work was to reveal the effects of VDR gene ApaI
rs7975232, BsmI rs1544410, TaqI rs731236, FokI rs2228570 and Cdx2
rs11568820 variants on 25(OH)D level in Belarusian women with OP.
Methods: Patients were recruited at 1st Minsk city clinic (Minsk,
Belarus). In total, 602 women met inclusion criteria, of them 355 patients
S312
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
with OP and 247 subjects from control group. BMD was evaluated by
DXA (GE Lunar, USA), serum vitamin D was determined by
electrochemiluminescence immunoassay (Cobas e411, Roche,
Switzerland). VDR gene variants markers were determined using the
quantitative PCR.
Results: We revealed significant association of rs1544410, and rs731236
gene variants with 25(OH)D level, which is gene/dose dependent: the
lowest vitamin level was typical for reference genotype, intermediate –
for heterozygotes and the highest – for the bearers of minor homozygous
genotypes (P<0.01). The opposite gene/dose relationship was revealed
for rs11568820 variant. We also assessed the distribution of each VDR
variant genotypes in different groups of study participants according to
vitamin D level (defined as sufficient, insufficient, deficient). Using χ2-
test, a significant difference in genotype distribution between groups was
revealed only for rs731236 variant (χ2=12.8, P=0.012, Figure). The G/G
genotype was over-represented in group of participants with “sufficient”
state, while A/A genotype was associated with vitamin D deficiency.
Figure. The association of serum 25(OH)D levels with VDR rs731236
genotype distribution in groups based on vitamin D status.
Conclusion: The data shows that the increased level of circulating
25(OH)D is observed in bearers of unfavorable VDR genotypes, associ-
ated with decreased receptor expression, possibly due to altered metabolic
feedback loops or effectiveness of vitamin metabolism. VDR gene vari-
ants should be considered for personalized vitamin D supplementation.
P629
THE BURDEN OF ILLNESS RELATED TO OSTEOPOROSIS IS
SIMILAR TO ARTHRITIS AND FIBROMYALGIA: THE
CIMPACO STUDY GROUP
L. Yang1, J. J. Carey2, B. McGowan2, E. Doherty3, S. O'Higgins4, B.
Whelan5, C. Silke5, M. O'Sullivan6, A. Gsel7, F. Heaney7, C.
Armstrong7, B. Connaughton7, N. Harrington5, S. Walsh4, B. McGuire4
1School of Engineering, National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway,
2School of Medicine, National University of Ireland, Galway, 3Health
Economics and Policy Analysis Centre, National University of Ireland,
Galway, 4Centre for Pain Research, School of Psychology, National
University of Ireland, Galway, 5Dept. of Rheumatology, Our Lady's
Hospital, Manorhamilton, 6Rheumatology Sligo, Sligo, 7Dept. of
Rheumatology, University Hospital Galway, Galway, Ireland
Objective: Musculoskeletal Diseases (MSK) represent the largest illness
burden in Europe. Osteoporosis is common, but the burden of illness
associated with this disease is under appreciated by governments, health
professionals and patients. Although Ireland has one of the highest frac-
ture incidences worldwide, formal epidemiology studies addressing the
illness burden are limited.
Methods: A multidisciplinary expert group of rheumatology, health eco-
nomics and psychology professionals designed a multifaceted question-
naire to understand the burden of illness for 5 types of arthritis, fibromy-
algia syndrome and osteoporosis. 2000 patients with a diagnosis of an-
kylosing spondylitis, fibromyalgia syndrome, gout, osteoarthritis, osteo-
porosis, psoriatic arthritis or rheumatoid arthritis were invited to complete
a detailed 16-page questionnaire, following IRB approval and informed
consent. Prevalence estimates for the Republic of Ireland (RoI) for each
illness were estimated using 2016 USA and UK reports and national RoI
2016 census population statistics.
Results: Osteoporosis affects around 200,000 Irish adults and results in
30,000 to 40,000 clinical fragility fractures each year. 652 completed
questionnaires were returned and available for analysis. Osteoporosis is
associated with significant pain, disability, depression, limited activity
and healthcare costs. Pain, disability and depression rates were similar
to arthritis and fibromyalgia syndrome.
Table. Comparison of Age, Gender, Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ), Pain, Depression and Activity Limitations between Different
Musculoskeletal Disorders.
Conclusion: The burden of illness associated with osteoporosis is sub-
stantial, and similar to arthritis in our clinic populations. Studies address-
ing quality of life for people with osteoporosis is an important consider-
ation in addition to fracture prevention.
P630
APPLICATION OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO
DETECTION OF PATIENTS WITH A HIGH RISK OF
FRACTURES IN THE RUSSIAN POPULATION
E. Gladkova1, O. Lesnyak1, O. Ershova2, I. Scripnikova3, O.
Anoshenkova4, K. Belova2, I. Belousova5, A. Dreval6, B.
Zavodovskij7, A. Latfullin8, I. Kryukova6, N. Leonova9, J. Poljakova6,
E. Poljakova6, A. Akhatov8, J. Ahverdjan7, M. Ilyin2, E. Leykauskene9,
L. Sivordova7, M. Grebenkina1, A. Kasimova1, I. Kolchinskij1
1North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov, St. Petersburg,
2Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Higher Education
"Yaroslavl State Medical University", Yaroslavl, 3Federal State
Budgetary Institution "National Medical Research Center for Therapy and
Preventive Medicine", Moscow, 4Federal State Budgetary Institution of
Higher Education "Siberian State Medical University", Tomsk, 5Federal
State Budgetary Institution "North Caucasian Federal Scientific and
Clinical Center of the Federal Medical and Biological Agency",
Lermontov, 6Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute M.F.
Vladimirskiy (MONIKI), Moscow, 7Federal State Budgetary Institution
“Zborovsky Research Institute of Clinical and Experimental
Rheumatology”, Volgograd, 8Medical Center "BARSMED", Kazan,
9Multi-field Medical Clinic "Anturium", Barnaul, Russia
S313
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: To compare the clinical and cost-effectiveness of two ap-
proaches to identifying patients at high risk of fractures: ISCD recom-
mendations for referral to DXA densitometry and the 10-y fracture risk
assessment tool (FRAX).
Methods: We conducted a multicenter, cross-sectional study of postmen-
opausal women who did not receive anti-osteoporosis therapy. The sam-
ple included 4042 postmenopausal women aged 40 years and older, res-
idents of 6 cities of the Russian Federation. Two approaches to identify-
ing patients at high risk of fractures were analyzed: referral of patients to
densitometry based on the 2019 ISCD recommendations, and identifica-
tion of patients at high risk of fractures based on the calculation of the 10-
year risk of fractures using the FRAX algorithm. Indicators of diagnostic
value of the methods were evaluated: sensitivity, specificity and accuracy
of the test, and the cost of diagnosing one case of high risk of fractures.
Results: The analysis showed that the use of a strategy based on the
recommendations of the ISCD leads to an unreasonably high number of
densitometric studies and an increase in the cost of diagnosing high risk
fractures. The use of the FRAX algorithm made it possible to identify a
larger number of patients with optimal use of the DXA resource. The
proportion of individuals who needed densitometry was 71.4% and
54.0% for ISCD and FRAX, respectively (p=0.0001). The sensitivity
index of the method using the FRAX score was 86.3% and did not differ
from that (85.1%) when detecting osteoporosis based on the ISCD rec-
ommendations (p=0.07). The FRAX method demonstrated higher speci-
ficity when compared with the ISCD recommendations approach (43.4%
and 31.9%, respectively, p=0.002) and accuracy (55.4% for FRAX and
42.2% for ISCD recommendations, p=0.001). The use of FRAX reduced
the cost of diagnosing 1 case of high-risk fractures by 1.9 times compared
to the use of the ISCD recommendations.
Conclusion: So, when comparing the diagnostic value of methods for
identifying patients with a high risk of fractures, it seems appropriate to
use the FRAX questionnaire. With sensitivity indicators comparable to
the ISCD recommendations, this method is characterized by higher spec-
ificity and accuracy, which minimizes the cost of diagnosing a high risk
of fractures.
P631
COVID-19 AND CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY RHEUMATISM:
RESULTS OF A SINGLE CENTER STUDY
N. Bahaz1, F. Mechid1, R. Benaziez1, N. Zehraoui1, H. Hafirassou1, A.
Rahmoune1, A. Ferhat1, S. Benaziez1, Y. Sadeg1, C. Dahou-Makhloufi1
1Rheumatology department, Mohamed Lamine Debaghine hospital.
Algiers, Algeria, Algiers, Algeria
Objective to describe clinical and therapeutic characteristics of patients
with chronic inflammatory rheumatism (CIR) contracting COVID-19
Methods: It is a single center observational study during May 2020-
April 2021. We study the demographic data, body mass index (BMI),
comorbidities, disease activity, DAS28 for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
ASDAS for spondyloarthritis (SpA). We compare the disease activity
before and after COVID-19.
Results: 43 patients with CIR and infected by the coronavirus were
collected, 58, 14% were female. 48, 83% had RA and 51,16% had
SpA, (ankylosing spondyloarthritis 39, 53%, psoriatic arthritis 6,97%
and enteric rheumatism 4,65%). The mean age was 49, 41 ± 12, 25 years
(30- 76 years), the mean BMI was 27, 93 ± 5.54kg / m2. 81, 39% of
patients had at least one comorbidity, the most frequent was hypertension
in 34, 88%. 74, 41% patients were on bDMARDs and 51, 16% were on
csDMARDs alone or combined with bDMARDs. 30, 23% were on oral
glucocorticoids, the medium dose was 5,76mg/ day of prednisone. The
diagnosis of COVID19 was made with PCR, serological testing and / or
chest CT. 2 patients had COVID19 after CD 20 inhibitor and one of them
had a pulmonary embolism. No patient was transferred to intensive care
unit and no deaths were noted. The mean DAS28 was 3,66 and the mean
ASDAS was 2,68.The disease activity before COVID 19 was low com-
pared to activity after COVID-19 (p=0, 03 for SpA, p=0, 02 for RA)
Conclusion: Through this study, we find that patients were overweight,
comorbidities were frequent and disease activity was low before
contracting COVID-19.
No conflicts of interest
References
[1] Michalis P. Migkos and al. Use of conventional synthetic and biologic
disease modifying anti‐rheumatic drugs in patients with rheumatic dis-
eases contracting COVID‐19: a single center experience. Rheumatology
International (2021) 41:903–909·
[2] Cong Ye and al. Clinical features of rheumatic patients infected with
COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. Ann Rheum Dis 2020; 79:1007–1013.
P632
THE IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON POPULATION-LEVEL DRUG
UTILIZATION OF ALENDRONATE
E. H. Tan1, D. Robinson1, A. Jödicke1, M. Mosseveld2, K. B. Nielsen3,
C. Reyes4, A. Voss5, E. Marconi6, F. Lapi6, J. Reinold5, K. Verhamme2,
L. Pedersen3, M. De Wilde2, M. Far4, M. Aragón4, P. Bosco-Levy7, R.
Lassalle7, D. Prieto-Alhambra1
1Centre for Statistics in Medicine, Nuffield Dept. of Orthopaedics,
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK, 2Dept. of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical
Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Dept. of Clinical Epidemiology,
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 4Fundació Institut
Universitari per a la recerca a l’Atenció Primària de Salut Jordi Gol i
Gurina, Barcelona, Spain, 5Dept. of Clinical Epidemiology, Leibniz
Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology – BIPS, Bremen,
Germany, 6Health Search, Italian College of General Practitioners and
Primary Care, Florence, Italy, 7Univ. Bordeaux, INSERM CIC-P1401,
Bordeaux PharmacoEpi, Bordeaux, France
Objective: Alendronate [ALN] is the most common osteoporosis medi-
cation prescribed in Europe. During the COVID-19 pandemic, non-
urgent visits to primary care were restricted, affecting the initiation of
new treatments. This study aimed to describe the effect of COVID-19
on the prescription of ALN to new users in three European databases.
Methods: We included patients aged ≥18 y and registered for ≥1 y in the
following databases: Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD, UK),
Integrated Primary Care Information Project (IPCI, Netherlands), and
Sistema d'Informació per al Desenvolupament de la Investigació en
Atenció Primària (SIDIAP, Spain). The number of new users of ALN
was obtained from prescription records between March 2019 and
September 2020 (June 2020 for SIDIAP, July 2020 for IPCI). New users
were defined as patients without a prescription for ALN in the preceding
year. Monthly incidence of use was calculated as incidence rate (IR),
where the numerator was all new users of ALN in a given calendar month,
and the denominator was person-years (PY) of people available in the
dataset on that given calendar month, who were not users of ALN as of
the last day of the prior calendar month and did not use ALN in the
previous year. The IR was compared before and after March 2020, when
lockdown was imposed due to COVID-19.
Results: The number of new users of ALN were 1582 in CPRD, 3898 in
IPCI and 13,109 in SIDIAP. Prior to lockdown, there was a general
upwards trend of new use in CPRD, with IR (per 10,000 PY) increasing
from 21.8 to 33.3 between March 2019 and March 2020. Similar trends
were seen in SIDIAP and IPCI. After March 2020, the start of lockdown,
rates of new use of ALN rapidly decreased in all countries from 33.3 to
12.7 for CPRD, 30.7 to 20.9 for IPCI and 27.1 to 11.6 for SIDIAP.
Recovery after the initial lockdown was observed with incidence of
new use reaching prepandemic levels in IPCI (28.9) and CPRD (27.5)
as of June and September 2020 respectively. As of June 2020, new ALN
use in SIDIAP (13.9) had not reached pre-pandemic levels.
S314
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: Following the COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns in
March 2020, the initiation of ALN declined in the immediate months
after in three European countries however recovery to pre-pandemic rates
have been seen.
Acknowledgments: This project was funded by UCB Pharma and
Amgen Inc.
P633
OSTEOPENIC SYNDROME AND INDICATORS OF BONE
MINERAL DENSITY IN ELDERLY WOMEN WITH
OSTEOARTHRITIS OF THE KNEE JOINT
E. V. Usova1, T. A. Raskina1, Y. V. Averkieva1, O. S. Malyshenko1, M.
V. Koroleva2, M. V. Letaeva1
1Federal State Educational Institution of Higher Education “Kemerovo
State Medical University” Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation,
2Federal State Educational Institution of Higher Education “Kemerovo
State Medical University”, Kemerovo, Russia
Objective: To compare the incidence of osteopenic syndrome and BMD
in older women with and without osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee joint.
Methods: The study includes 26 patients (average age 63.4±6.51 y) with
OA of the knee joint established according to the ACR criteria (1991).
The control group was composed of 28 women without clinical signs of
OA (average age 64.7±7.29 y). The BMD (g/cm2) and the T-score (stan-
dard deviation, CO) of the femur neck and lumbar spine (LI-LIV) were
evaluated by DXA method (Lunar Prodigy Primo, USA). DXA data were
interpreted using the following reference intervals: normal BMD (T-score
-1 CO), osteopenia (OPe) (T-score -1 to -2.5 CO) and osteoporosis (OP)
(T-score<-2.5 CO).
Results: OPe were statistically significantly more frequent in OA
patients (46.2%) than in the control group (17.9%), p=0.024. In con-
trast, OP was significantly higher among women in the control group
(78.6%), compared to OA patients (50%), p=0.036. The frequency of
detection of a normal BMD was comparable in these groups (3.8 vs.
3.6%) p=0.077. In the analysis of BMD indicators depending on
locale, the BMD of the femur neck in patients with OA was found
to be 0.823 (0.758; 0.897) g/cm2, corresponding to -1.60 (-2.00; -
1.02) T-score CO, of the lumbar spine - 1.000 (0.864; 1.050) g/cm2
and -1.70 (-3.00; -1.10) CO by T-score. For women in the control
group, the following BMD values are recorded: 0.769 (0.710; 0.833)
g/cm2 and 0.922 (0.867; 0.950) g/cm2, corresponding to -1.95 (-2.42;
-1.50) CO and -2.20 (-2.60; -1.90) CO for the T-score of the femur
neck and the lumbar spine, respectively. A comparative analysis
showed that the BMD of the lumbar spine was significantly higher
in women with OA compared to the control group (p=0.018). When
comparing the BMD and the T-score of the femur neck, no signifi-
cant difference is made between the study groups (p>0.05).
Conclusion: OPe was significantly more frequent in OA patients and OP
in women’s control group. The BMD in the lumbar spine is statistically
higher among women with OA than in the control group.
P634
T R E A T M E N T P A T T E R N S F O R O S T E O P O R O S I S
MEDICATIONS IN FIVE EUROPEAN COUNTRIES: A
MULTINATIONAL REAL WORLD COHORT ANALYSIS
D. E. Robinson1, E. H. Tan1, A. Jödicke1, M. Mosseveld2, K.
Bødkergaard3, C. Reyes4, A. Voss5, E. Marconi6, F. Lapi6, J. Reinold5,
K. Verhamme2, L. Pedersen3, M. De Wilde2, M. Far4, M. Aragón4, P.
Bosco-Levy7, R. Lassalle7, D. Prieto-Alhambra1
1Centre for Statistics in Medicine, Nuffield Dept. of Orthopaedics,
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK, 2Dept. of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University
Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Dept. of Clinical
Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,
4Fundació Institut Universitari per a la recerca a l’Atenció Primària de
Salut Jordi Gol i Gurina, Barcelona, Spain, 5Dept. of Clinical
Epidemiology, Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and
Epidemiology – BIPS, Bremen, Germany, 6Health Search, Italian
College of General Practitioners and Primary Care, Florence, Italy,
7Univ. Bordeaux, INSERM CIC-P1401, Bordeaux PharmacoEpi,
Bordeaux, France
Objective: Describe the patterns of use of different osteoporosis medica-
tions and the switching between osteoporosis medications in the 2 years
after starting treatment in 5 European countries.
Methods: Routinely collected data from five European databases was
used, Integrated Primary Care Information Project (IPCI, Netherlands),
Health Search Database (HSD, Italy), Clinical Practice Research Datalink
(CPRD, UK), Sistema d'Informació per al Desenvolupament de la
Investigació en Atenció Primària (SIDIAP, Spain) and Nationwide linked
Danish registries (NDR, Denmark). Osteoporosis medications were
categorised as alendronate [ALN], other oral bisphosphonates
(ibandronate and risedronate), intravenous bisphosphonates (ibandronate
and zoledronate), denosumab [DENO], teriparatide and selective estro-
gen receptor modulators (raloxifene, bazedoxifene and lasofozifene).
Prescriptions (dispensations in SIDIAP) after 2018 (2016 in NDR) were
identified in patients aged ≥18. Patients were new users when they were
not prescribed the same drug class in 1 year prior to cohort entry, respec-
tively. Proportions (number and percent) of each patient starting each
medication, and key descriptive characteristics were identified. Sankey
diagrams were produced depicting switching at 6 month intervals be-
tween each drug category including censoring and stopping for each
database [results not shown].
Results: A total of 2738, 34,823, 11,039, 10,757 and 38,141 new users of
osteoporosis medications were identified in CPRD, SIDIAP, IPCI, HSD
and NDR respectively. In all databases the most common new prescrip-
tion was ALN (~85% in CPRD and NDR, ~55% in SIDIAP, IPCI and
HSD). Within 2 years, 3%, 4.3%, 6.2%, 2.3%, and 1.6% of ALN users
switched (CPRD, SIDIAP, IPCI, HSD and NDR, respectively).
Switching in DENO users was less frequent (range 0.6% in NDR to
1.7% in SIDIAP) than ALN. Switching of other medication use was
similar. At 6 months, adherence to ALN was low with <80% of patients
still reported to use the drug in all databases (range 44% in HSD to 71% in
CPRD).
Conclusion: Switching of osteoporosis medications was uncommon in
all databases and more common in ALN user than DENO users. Less than
80% of ALN users were persistent at 6 months.
Acknowledgements: This project was funded by UCB Pharma and
Amgen Inc.
P636
THE BURDEN OF ILLNESS ASSOCIATED WITH
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISEASES IS PARTLY EXPLAINED
BY MULTIMORBIDITY: THE CIMPACO STUDY GROUP
L. Yang1, J. J. Carey2, B. McGowan2, E. Doherty3, S. O'Higgins4, B.
Whelan5, C. Silke5, M. O'Sullivan6, A. Gsel7, F. Heaney7, C.
Armstrong7, B. Connaughton7, N. Harrington5, S. Walsh4, B. McGuire4
1School of Engineering, National University of Ireland, Galway, 2School
of Medicine, National University of Ireland, Galway, 3Health Economics
and Policy Analysis Centre, National University of Ireland, Galway,
4Centre for Pain Research, School of Psychology, National University
of Ireland, Galway, 5Dept. of Rheumatology, Our Lady's Hospital,
Manorhamilton, 6Rheumatology Sligo, Sligo, 7Dept. of Rheumatology,
University Hospital Galway, Galway, Ireland
Objective: Musculoskeletal Diseases (MSK) are associated with disabil-
ity, reduced quality and quantity of life and significant healthcare costs.
Epidemiologic studies usually focus on single diagnoses, though
multimorbidity is common.
S315
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Method: A multidisciplinary expert group of rheumatology, health eco-
nomics and psychology professionals designed a multifaceted question-
naire to understand the burden of illness for 5 types of arthritis, fibromy-
algia syndrome and osteoporosis. 2000 patients with a diagnosis of an-
kylosing spondylitis, fibromyalgia syndrome, gout, osteoarthritis, osteo-
porosis, psoriatic arthritis or rheumatoid arthritis were invited to complete
a detailed 16-page questionnaire, following IRB approval and informed
consent. Prevalence estimates for the Republic of Ireland (RoI) for each
illness were estimated using 2016 USA and UK reports and national RoI
2016 census population statistics.
Results: 652 completed questionnaires were returned and available for
analysis. All diagnoses were associated with significant pain, disability,
depression, limited activity and healthcare costs. A significant proportion
of respondents reported at least 1 or more comorbidities. A strong asso-
ciation was noted between the number of comorbidities and disability,
pain, reduced quality of life and healthcare costs.
Table. Age, gender, Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), pain, de-
pression and activity impairment of patients with 1, 2 or 3 or more mus-
culoskeletal disorders.
Conclusion: Multimorbidity is common in musculoskeletal diseases and
strongly linked to disability and reduced quality of life. This warrants
further consideration in epidemiologic studies and patient management
strategies.
P637
FRACTURE RISK ASSOCIATED WITH COMORBIDITIES
AND MEDICATION USE IN PATIENTS SCREENED IN A
FRACTURE LIAISON SERVICE
F. Nazaré1, F. Cunha Santos2, A. S. Pinto2, S. Paiva Dinis2, C. Vaz3, J. F.
Ferreira3
1Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã,
2Guarda Local Health Unit, Rheumatology, Guarda, 3Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Guarda Local Health
Unit, Rheumatology, Guarda, Portugal
Objective: Assess the risk of fracture associated with comorbidities and
with chronic medication. Associate comorbidities and chronic medication
as bone-related risk factors and risk factors related to falls. Determine the
prevalence of risk factors related to bone and related to fall, in this
population.
Methods: Observational, cross-sectional and retrospective study of con-
secutive patients followed at a fracture liaison service of a tertiary hospital
between 1 January 2017 and 31 August 2020 with both comorbidities and
chronic medication systematically assessed. Comorbidities were classi-
fied according to the International Statistical Classification of Diseases
and Related Health Problems - 10 and chronic medication according to
the Anatomic Therapeutic Chemical classification and were categorized
as associated with decreased bone mass or risk of falling. Number of
previous fractures and BMD were correlated with the number of risk
factors analysed.
Results: Of the 189 patients referred to the fracture liaison service, 154
patients were included. 89% were female, with an average age of 77.4
±10.0 y with 81.8% with ≥70 y. 91.6% have at least one bone risk factor,
92.2% at least one fall risk factor and only one patient without any risk
factor (0.6%). 87% had at least one fall-related comorbidity and 77%
were medicated with at least one fall-enhancing drug. 6.13±3.4 risk
factors were identified in average. Patients with ≥2 fractures have more
fall-related comorbidities (p-value=0.029).
Conclusion: Multiple risk factors were identified, with heterogeneous
overlaps and a multitude of combinations. This points to the need for
an integrated assessment of all risk factors related to falls, in addition to
bone risk factors assessment in a fracture liaison service. It also reinforces
the importance of including systematic assessment of fall risk in this
population, and the subsequent implementation of fall prevention
strategies.
P638
XANTHINE OXIDOREDUCTASE ACTIVITY IN BLOOD
D E P E N D I N G O N T H E F U N C T I O N A L C L A S S O F
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS PATIENTS
E. E. Mozgovaya1, S. A. Bedina1, A. S. Trofimenko1, M. A. Mamus1, S.
S. Spitsina1, I. A. Zborovskaya1
1Research Institute of Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology A.B.
Zborovsky, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: The full life of RA patients depends on the preservation of
their functional capabilities. The preservation of the patient ability to carry
out professional, nonprofessional activities, self-service are estimated by
the functional class. Obviously, it is associated with the severity of the
clinical picture: RA activity, the presence of extra-articular manifesta-
tions, the severity of bone resorption. Xanthin oxidoreductase (XOR),
which has prooxidant activity, can aggravate these processes. This study
aimed to evaluate the changes of XOR interconvertible forms (xanthine
oxidase (XO), ЕС 1.17.3.2 and xanthine dehydrogenase (XDG), ЕС
1.17.1.4) activities in plasma and lysed red blood cells (RBCs) depending
on the functional class of RA patients.
Methods: Diagnosis of RA was verified using the ACR/EULAR criteria
(2010). XO and XDG activities were measured in plasma and lysed
RBCs by spectrophotometric method [1]. The results were expressed as
Ме (Q25; Q75). Spearman's correlation coefficient was used. Differences
were considered significant when p<0.05.
Results: 77 patients (57 females, 20 males) were enrolled in the study.
Mean age of patients was 45 (37; 49) y, mean RA duration was 8 (6; 10)
y. 16 (20.8%) patients had low disease activity (DAS 28), moderate and
high disease activities were determined in 49 (63.6%) and 12 (15.6%)
cases, respectively. Extra-articular manifestations were revealed in 32
(41.6%) patients. Most RA patients had II and III radiological stages
(by Steinbroker criteria): 39 (50.6%) and 24 (31.2%), respectively. 30
(39%) patients were related to the second functional class, 40 (51.9%)
to the third functional class, 7 (9.1%) to the fourth functional class. The
XO and XDG activities of lysed RBCs as well as the XO activity of
plasma were correlated with the functional class of RA patients
(p<0,001). High functional classes of RA were characterized by more
high XO activities in plasma and RBCs as well as lower XDH activities
in RBCs.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that the deterioration in the functional
capabilities of RA patients are accompanied by an increase activity of XO
(oxidase form of XOR), which produces reactive oxygen species that
have a damaging effect on body tissues.
Reference: 1. Zborovskaya IA, et al. Russian J Pain 2018;3:47
P639
S C L E R O D E R M A S Y S T E M I C : C L I N I C A L A N D
IMMUNOLOGICAL PROFILE OF 22 CASES
R. Hassani1, M. Djennane1, L. Igueni1
1University Hospital Center of Tizi-ouzou, Dept. of Rheumatology, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria,
Objective: Systemic sclerosis is an autoimmune connective tissue dis-
ease, arterioles and microvessels. It is characterized by fibrosis and
S316
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
vascular obstruction may affect in particular the skin, gastrointestinal
tract, lung and kidney. The purpose of our work is to clarify the clinical
and immunological profile of 22 patients with systemic sclerosis (SS).
Methods: This is a retrospective study spanning from January 2009 to
April 2019 on 22 cases (SS) hospitalized at University Hospital
Rheumatology Dept. of Tizi-ouzou.
Results: These 03 men and 19 women whose average age was 49 y [25-
81 y], the duration of progression of the disease is 6 y on average. The
skin involvement was present in 19 sclerosus atrophy type patients in 17
cases (89%) with melanodermic appearance in 3 cases and presence of
telangiectasia in 4 cases. It was a limited form in 16 cases, 1 case SC
diffuse scleroderma sine 5 cases. Raynaud's phenomenon was present in
20 cases (91%) with pulp ulcers in 7 cases. 1 case of subcutaneous calci-
nosis was noted. The articular manifestations are noted in 17 patients
(77%), they are the type of arthritis in 10 cases (59%), monoarthritis
law 1 case knee, left hip 1 case, and inflammatory polyarthralgia in 10
cases (59%). Pulmonary involvement was found in 8 cases (36%) type
interstitial lung disease in 7 cases and 1 case of precapillary PAH. The
digestive involvement was noted in 6 patients (27%) dominated by
esophageal involvement in all cases. Cardiac involvement was noted in
4 patients (18%) type of pericarditis in 3 cases, and 1 case of congestive
heart failure. Renal involvement in turn was noted in 4 patients with type
of transient proteinuria averaging 0.24g/24. Bone densitometry was per-
formed in 09 patients showed osteoporosis in 6 cases. An immunological
assessment was performed in 17 patients found positive FAN in 16 of
them [anti-Scl-70 (50%), anticentromere (23%)]. 14 patients have inflam-
matory syndrome knowing that 2 patients had lupus partner, 2 other
inflammatory myopathy, 2 other rheumatoid arthritis, 2 other Sjögren’s
syndrome and one patient with primary biliary cholangitis. The evolution
was marked by the occurrence of joint deformities in 5 cases, acro-
osteolysis in one case and a cardiac decompensation in a case.
Conclusion: Our series confirms the predominance of female (SS) in its
limited cutaneous form. It is characterized by its association with
antitopoisomerase type I (anti-Scl-70) which are usually very specific
diffuse cutaneous forms with a high frequency of joint damage (77%)
source of functional and aesthetic damage.
P640
EFFECTIVENESS OF COGNITIVE BEHAVIOURAL THERAPY
ON PAIN AND FUNCTION FOLLOWING TOTAL KNEE
REPLACEMENT IN ADULTS WITH OSTEOARTHRITIS:
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND META-ANALYSIS
O. Caliskan1, A. Begde1, M. Hall2, G. Pope2
1National Centre of Sports and Exercise Medicine, School of Sports and
Exercise Science, Loughborough University, Loughborough, 2Division
of Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation Sciences, Clinical Sciences Building,
Nottingham City Hospital, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Objective: Total knee replacement (TKR) is a largely successful proce-
dure, and 66% of patients who have undergone it report that “it feels
normal”. However, around 20% of patients experience chronic pain post-
operatively without a clear reason, such as instability. Preoperative de-
pression, pain elsewhere, and negative thoughts are related to poor out-
comes following TKR. Cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is short-
term psychotherapy consisting of between 5-20 sessions used to improve
outcomes for people at risk of prolonged postoperative pain. This study
aimed to to investigate the effectiveness of CBT in addition to usual care,
on pain and function following TKR.
Methods: A systematic search for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) was
conducted up to August 2020 using the following databases: Cochrane
Library, Medline, AMED, PubMed and EMBASE. Studies were assessed
for quality using The PEDro scale. Searches and study selection, quality as-
sessment and data extraction were carried out by two independent researchers.
The primary outcome was pain, and physical function was a secondary
outcome. Effect sizes were calculated using the standardised mean difference
(SMD) and were pooled using the random-effects model in RevMan.
Results: 5 RCTs with 557 participants were included in the review. All
studies were judged as high quality studies scoring ≥8 out of a possible 11
against the Pedro scale. Meta-analysis of all studies for pain between 3
and 6 months showed the pooled SMD was -0.25 (95%CI: -0.64, 0.14)
with I2=74% and p=0.20 (figure 1). Another meta-analysis of three of five
included studies whose VAS and NRS results alone at 12 months showed
that the pooled SMD was 0.01 (95%CI: -0.19, 0.21) with I2=0% and
p=0.91 for pain. Two studies reported effectiveness of CBT on
WOMAC physical function at six months (pooled SMD=-0.48 (95%CI:
-1.53, 0.58)) and two studies used the 6-minute walk test at 12 months
(pooled SMD was 0.08 (95%CI: -0.16, 0.32)
Conclusion: CBT added to usual care is slightly more effective than
usual care alone on pain and physical function in the first 6 months. At
12 months, the effects on pain and physical function had disappeared.
Overall, there was no statistically significant difference between groups.
P641
GENETIC MARKERS OF OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA IN
BELARUSIAN PATIENTS
K. Kobets1, P. Marozik1, A. Pachkaila2, E. Rudenka3
1Institute of Genetics and Cytology of the National Academy of Sciences
of Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education,
3Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus
Objective: Pathogenic substitutions in the coding part of the type 1 col-
lagen genes COL1A1 and COL1A2 negatively affect the formation of the
quaternary structure of collagen protein, impairing bone strength. This
can lead to various bone pathologies, including osteogenesis imperfecta
(OI). This disease of the connective tissue manifests itself at an early age
by curvature, shortening of bones, accompanied by difficulty in move-
ment, frequent fractures, and more. The frequency of OI in the population
is 1 per 10,000 - 20,000 people. In order to simplify the diagnosis of OI
among the selected patients, an analysis of COL1A1 and COL1A2 muta-
tions was performed.
Methods: To identify pathogenic mutations in the COL1A1 and COL1A2
genes, 92 samples of OI patients were sequenced using MiSeq (Illumina)
custom panel. NGS results were verified using Sanger sequencing.
Pathogenicity was assessed based on international guidelines for NGS
data analysis.
Results: In total, 34 mutations were identified in the protein-coding sequence
of the collagen genes COL1A1 and COL1A2 in 58 patients. The pathogenic
mutations identified during the experiment are listed in the figure 1. Previously
undescribedsubstitutionsare highlightedinred,andalreadyknownpathogenic
ones are highlighted in blue. In the COL1A1 gene, 9 previously undescribed
mutations were found: c.G4123A, c.A4103G, c.C3982A, c.2550delA,
c.2238delT, c.2114delA, c.G868C, c.G662A, c.G3653A. For the most severe
immobilized patients were identified c.C3982A and c.G868C with phenotypic
features of types I and III OI, respectively. Among 5 new mutations of the
COL1A2 gene: c.1036-2A> G, c. G1856A, c.G2359A, c.G2387C, c.G2809T
the carrier of the c.G2359A gene replacement moves with the help of a
wheelchair, has OI type III.
Conclusion: The revealed mutations will help in the future to carry out a
more accurate diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta and identify the type
of this disease during molecular genetic testing.
Acknowledgement: This work was carried out within the framework of
the Union State project ("DNA identification") for 2017-2021, task 6.3.
S317
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure. Identified mutations associated with osteogenesis imperfecta. a – COL1A1 gene; b –
COL1A2 gene.
P642
THE COURSE OF OSTEOARTHRITIS DEPENDING ON
DISEASE DURATION (PRELIMINARY DATA)
E. Taskina1, N. Kashevarova1, K. Telyshev1, E. Strebkova1, E.
Sharapova1, L. Alekseeva1, A. Lila1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To assess the effect of osteoarthritis (OA) duration on clinical
manifestations and radiographic properties of the disease
Methods: 128 female knee osteoarthritis patients meeting the ACR
osteoarthritis criteria were enrolled in this prospective study. Patients
had varying radiologic stages (I-III according to Kellgren-Lawrence)
and signed an informed consent. Mean patient age was 57.4±7.6 y (38-
72), duration of the disease was 6.0 (4-8) y. An individual study card was
filled out for each patient, which included anthropometrics, disease
history and clinical examination data, visual analog scale (VAS) knee
pain evaluation, WOMAC, KOOS, DN4 indices and concomitant disease
information. All patients underwent plain knee radiography and knee
ultrasonography. Most of the patients (72%) had stage II osteoarthritis,
16% had stage I, and stage III was detected in 12% of patients.
Results: Patients were divided into 2 groups: the first group included
females with short disease duration (<5 y, n=38), the second group
included patients with OA duration over 5 y (n=90). The patients in the
first group were significantly younger in comparison to the other group
(54 (46-58) vs. 62.5 (58-68) years old, p=0.003), had lower VAS knee
pain when walking (43 (30-50) vs. 50 (40-57) mm, p=0.04), lower DN4
(1 (0-2) vs. 2 (1-3) points, p=0.0003), better global VAS patient health
parameters (37 (30-46) vs. 45 (35-59) mm, p=0.008) and better KOOS
index values (61 (53-83) vs. 47 (36-55) points, p=0.0001). When
assessing weight and BMI, there were no significant intergroup
differences (p>0.05), however, patients with short disease duration had
lower waist circumference values (87 (84-95) vs. 92 (88-104) cm,
respectively, p=0.003). When assessing knee radiograms, the shorter
duration group had smaller median osteophyte values both in the medial
and in the lateral condylar compartments of the femur (1.3 (1-4.5) vs. 3.3
(2.8-5.8) mm, p=0.05 and 1.4 (1-2.1) vs. 4.3 (2.5-7.1) mm, respectively,
p=0.02); ultrasonography showed larger intact cartilage in the short
duration group (medially 1.5 (1.3-1.6) vs. 1.2 (0.9-1.5) mm, p=0.02,
laterally – 1.6 (1.4-1.7) vs. 1.4 (1.2-1.6) mm, p=0.03). There was also
an intergroup difference in terms of glycated hemoglobin levels (5.3 (4.8-
5.5)% vs. 5.7 (5.6-5.9)%, p=0.0003). The Spearman correlation analysis
confirmed positive correlations (p<0.05) between short OA duration and
higher intact cartilage values by US, better KOOS index. Moreover,
negative relation was established between the disease duration (Table)
and age, osteophyte size, waist circumference, hip circumference,
glycated hemoglobin values, menopause duration, radiologic lateral joint
space, VAS knee pain.
Table. Correlation coefficients between short disease duration and OA
risk and progression factors.
Parameter
OA duration less
than 5 years
P value
HbA1c,%
-0.56
<0.0001
Age, years
-0.48
<0.0001
KOOS, points
0.45
<0.0001
DN4, points
-0.38
0.0001
Lateral femoral condyle
osteophyte size, mm
-0.34
0.02
Waist circumference, cm
-0.32
0.002
Medial cartilage (US), mm
0.3
0.02
Lateral cartilage (US), mm
0.3
0.03
General patient health (VAS), mm
-0.29
0.005
Lateral knee joint space, mm
(X-ray)
-0.23
0.03
VAS knee pain, mm
-0.21
0.04
Conclusion: Our data confirms that patients with short OA duration
showed more favorable disease course: knee pain was less intense,
KOOS index values were better, neuropathic pain descriptors were less
frequent, instrumental means of evaluation showed a more intact cartilage
and smaller osteophytes. In addition, in short duration group there were
lower glycated hemoglobin levels, lower waist circumference with
comparable weight and BMI, which may indicate more significant
prevalence of metabolic syndrome in patients with longstanding OA.
P643
FALLS IN OSTEOPOROSIS: SARCOPENIA, A RISK FACTOR
TO BE CONSIDERED
E. Zigoura1, N. Veronese2, R. Sulpasso3, A. Floris1, A. Piana1, M.
Spanio4, A. Pilotto5
1Bone Unit, Dept. of Geriatric Care, Orthogeriatrics and Rehabilitation,
Galliera Hospital, Genova, 2Dept. of internal Medicine and Geriatrics,
University of Palermo, Palermo, 3Dept. of Interdisciplinary Medicine,
University of Bari, Bari, 4Dept. of Clinical Engineering and
Communication, Genova, 5Dept. of Geriatric Care, Orthogeriatrics and
Rehabilitation, Galliera Hospital and Dept. of Interdisciplinary Medicine,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy
Objective: To investigate the presence of sarcopenia and the sarcopenia-
related parameters in women with osteoporosis who had 3 or more falls
during the last year.
Methods: 20 women (mean age 77±10 years old) who referred to our
Bone Unit from December 2019 to February 2020 were examined. They
all were under treatment for osteoporosis and had 3 or more falls during
the last year. Strength was measured using the hand grip dynamometer
(HD). Body composition was estimated by Bioelectrical Impedance
Analysis (BIA). The physical performance was evaluated by Short
Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) and by Timed Up and Go test
(TUG). Frailty was evaluated using the Selfy Multidimensional
Prognostic Index (Selfy-MPI) that includes information about cognitive
and functional status, nutrition, comorbidity, number of drugs and social
factors; MPI 1 is for low, MPI 2 is for moderate and MPI 3 is for high risk
of frailty. Only women with Selfy-MPI 1 were included.
Results: They all presented strength <16 kg with a media of 7.3 kg
(dinamopenia). The BMI was 20.6 kg/m² (range 14-25.6 kg/m²) and the
skeletal muscle mass index (SMI), as revealed by BIA, was under 6 kg/m²
in all of them (sarcopenia). No correlation between strength, muscle mass
(SMI) and BMI was found. Only 3 of them presented SPPB >8, whereas
TUG was over 12 s in only one subject.
S318
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: The assessment of sarcopenia in osteoporotic patients
should be included in the evaluation of the risk of falls in order to prevent
fractures, physical disability and functional impairment.
P644
THE EFFECTS OF STATIN USE ON BONE MINERAL
DENSITY
A. McDonough1, E. Laird2, C. F. Hughes3, H. McNulty3, M. Ward3, J. J.
Strain3, A. Anne2, C. Cunningham4, K. McCarroll1
1Bone Health and Osteoporosis Unit, Mercer's Institute for Successful
Ageing, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 2Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland, 3Ulster University, Coleraine, UK, 4Mercer's Institute for
Successful Ageing, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Objective: Statin use has been associated with greater BMD and reduced
fracture risk in several studies. However, studies are conflicting and the
potential mechanism by which it may impact on BMD is unknown, with
the effect potentially limited to lipophilic statins. This study aimed to
explore the relationship between statin use and BMD in older, Irish
adults.
Methods: Study participants were derived from the Trinity Ulster Dept.
of Agriculture (TUDA) patient cohort of over 5000 community-dwelling,
Irish adults aged >60 y. Participants who were treatment naïve to
osteoporosis medications and had BMD measurements of the spine and
hip using DXA were included. The relationship between statin use and
BMD was explored in multinomial regression models.
Results: We identified 3663 patients, mean age 73.4 y (range 60-98.8),
58.5% female with 55.6% (n=2,046) were using statins. Statin use was
positively associated with BMD at the total hip (P=0.01) and spine
(P=0.01), before and after adjustment for age, gender, BMI, smoking and
alcohol use, steroid use, physical frailty (Timed Up and Go), cardiovascular
disease history and serum CRP. We identified a non-significant difference
(P=0.88) in BMD between users of lipophilic vs. hydrophobic statins.
There was no association between statin use and bone turnover markers.
Conclusion: We identified that statin use was independently associated
with greater BMD at the total hip and spine. Whilst there was no
difference in BMD between different statin classes, the study may have
been underpowered to detect this. The mechanism by which statins may
affect BMD is unclear, with some studies suggesting both anabolic and
anti-resorptive effects. Our findings were independent of cardiovascular
disease and CRP, suggesting a mechanism not related to inflammation or
endothelial/vascular dysfunction, Furthermore, statins appeared to have
no effect on bone turnover markers. Given the widespread use of statins,
any positive effect on BMD (albeit small) could have a big impact on
bone health at a population level. More research is needed to better
understand the mechanisms and effect of statins on BMD.
P645
DOWN SYNDROME: AN ACCELERATED UNDIAGNOSED
MUSCULOSKELETAL AGING
E. Zigoura1, C. Prete2, B. Senesi2, A. Floris1, M. Vigo1, M. Fama1, C.
Borello1, O. Parodi1, A. Pilotto3
1Bone Unit, Dept. of Geriatric Care, Orthogeriatrics and Rehabilitation,
Galliera Hospital, Genova, 2Down Syndrome Centre, Dept. of Geriatric
Care, Orthogeriatrics and Rehabilitation, Galliera Hospital, Genova,
3Dept. of Geriatric Care, Orthogeriatrics and Rehabilitation, Galliera
Hospital and Dept. of Interdisciplinary Medicine, University of Bari,
Bari, Italy
Objective: To evaluate the prevalence of low bone mass density and low
muscle mass in adults with Down syndrome (DS).
Methods: 20 adults with DS (mean age 38 years old) were referred
to our day hospital of the Geriatric Dept. of Galliera Hospital,
Genoa, from October 2020 to April 2021. Information about
nutritional status, comorbid conditions and pharmacological
treatment were collected. BMI was calculated. Bone metabolism
parameters were assessed by the laboratory. Strength was measured
using the hand grip test. Body composition was estimated by
Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA). BMD was assessed by
DXA at the femoral neck and at the lumbar spine. X-rays were
performed in patients with low back pain.
Results: Almost all patients were overweight (17 out of 20) with BMI=28
±2.3 kg/m² and 16 of them had vitamin D deficiency (media 15.5 ng/ml).
DXA revealed a low bone mass density in all of them with a z-score -1.5
±0.6 and a T-score -2.5±0.6. They all presented low hand grip test; 6.7
±0.5 kg for the women and 12.4±0.7 kg for the men. Skeletal muscle
mass index was 9.4±1.2 kg/m² in men and 7.86±0.7 kg/m² in women. X-
rays revealed vertebral fractures due to fragility in three of them.
Conclusion: DS individuals present low BMD, and dinamopenia rather
than sarcopenia. Low muscle mass indexes were not strictly associated
with reduced hand grip strength. The assessment of muscle mass and
bone density should be included in the routine evaluation of this
population so as to prevent fragility fractures and loss of autonomy in
DS population.
P646
OSTEOPOROSIS IN PATIENTS WITH TURNER SYNDROME
S.-A. Preda1, M.-J. uculina2, L.-E. Stoica3, A. Camen4, M.-R. Mitroi5, N.
Ionovici6, A. Boicea6, F. Nechita7, D.-M. Albulescu8, A.- Enescu8, G.
Mitroi9
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of
Dermatology Clinic, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova,
Dept. of Oral & Maxillofacial surgery, 5University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology, 6University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Medicine & Professional Diseases, 7University of
Medicine & Pharmacy Dept. of Medical Psychology, 8University of
Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Anatomy, 9University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Urology, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Turner syndrome (TS) is a rare disorder that affects female
subjects with an incidence of 1/2500 to 1/3000 live female newborns,
being the consequence of a numerical gonosomal distortion. Clinical
semiology of patients with TS is: stature hypotrophy, late puberty/
ovarian failure. Bone age is generally delayed compared to the
chronological one, the progression is slow secondary being the
consequence of an inadequate production of sex hormones. [1-10].
Craniofacial development is delayed with 2-3 y while dental development
is early (6 months - 3.5 y). Typical modifications in the facial skeleton
are: reduced development of the cranial base, hypertelorism, maxillary
hypoplasia, micrognathia, high palatal arch, bilateral crossing with or
without palatoschisis, open anterior bite, malocclusion class II. The
identification cases with Turner syndrome with female phenotype,
chromosomal studies, evaluation of BMD, study of dental morphology.
[3,5,9-12].
Methods: The study was performed on 21 cases of TS, with age between
11.8-18.2 y. The karyotype study was performed, the BMD was assessed
by DXA, the assessment of various craniofacial anthropometric variables
was done by lateral cephalometry.
Results: On 68% of cases (14 cases) osteoporosis was highlighted, the
karyotype study specified the diagnosis of TS. The craniofacial
morphological characteristics of the group we studied showed a reduction
of the posterior base of the skull, the reduction of the length of the
mandible and maxilla, the retrognation of the mandible and maxilla.
Even if our group included a small number of subjects, the values
obtained by us fall into the craniofacial typology characteristic of children
with growth hormone deficiency.
S319
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusions: The initiation of growth hormone replacement therapy
proves good therapeutic tolerance as well as a good recovery of stature
deficiency by periodically evaluating anthropometric and developmental
indices in dynamics under permanent growth hormone replacement
therapy. It is necessary to increase bone mass to correct osteoporosis
and reduce the incidence of fractures [13-16].
References:
1.
Popescu SM, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1439
2.
Dăguci L, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:1
3.
Dăguci C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:401
4.
Răescu M, et al. Environ Eng Manag J 2010; 9:1521
5.
Voinea Georgescu R, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:13
6.
Tonescu IG, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:138
7.
Cenușoiu A, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:57
8.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
9.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
10.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
11.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
12.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
13.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
14.
Gheorghiță LM, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:216
15.
Cotocel CC, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1053
16.
Nechita D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1059
P647
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF BONE CELL BIOLOGY
S.-A. Preda1, M.-J. uculina2, L.-E. Stoica3, A. Camen4, M.-R. Mitroi5, N.
Ionovici6, A. Boicea6, F. Nechita7, D.-M. Albulescu8, A.- Enescu8, G.
Mitroi9
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of
Dermatology Clinic, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova,
Dept. of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, 5University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology, 6University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Medicine and Professional Diseases, 7University of
Medicine & Pharmacy Dept. of Medical Psychology, 8University of
Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Anatomy, 9University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Urology, Craiova, Romania
Far from being an inert envelope surrounding the bone marrow, thus
protecting hemopoiesis and the development of the immune system, bone
is a complex organ, constantly changing under the control of hormones,
cytokines, central and sympathetic nervous systems, and which itself
functions as a endocrine organ. As in other complex organs, bone
function is controlled by a range of specialized cell types; they are located
on the bone surface or inside the mineralized matrix. [1,2-7].
Osteoblasts are those cells that form the bone matrix. However, cells on
the osteoblast line have a wide range of functions and confusion has
arisen when the term "osteoblasts" is used to describe cells in other stages
of the osteoblast line that are not prepared to actively form a bone matrix..
Mature osteoblasts are easily recognized histologically as cuboidal cells,
mononuclear cells that are found in groups on the matrix that synthesized
them. [3,5,8-13].
They are full of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and predominantly
synthesize type I collagen and noncollagen proteins, including
osteocalcin, osteonectin, bone sialoprotein, and bone proteoglycans
I (biglycan) and II (decorin). They possess many receptors,
including the receptor (PTH1R) for PTH and PTHrP, allowing them
to respond to growth factors and cytokines produced by osteoblastic
line cells.
Osteocytes are terminally differentiated osteoblasts that have been trapped
inside the bone matrix. They become embedded in gaps in the bone matrix,
connect with each other and with the cell surface through their intercellular
processes full of canalicular fluid content. Osteocytes are the most
abundant bone cells (85-90%) and have a long lifespan. [7,9,14-16].
Osteocyte-derived sclerostin. Osteocytes have long been thought to
function as sensors of pressure change and microaggression, but the
new approaches have recently been adopted through studies of osteocyte
function, largely as a result of the discovery of genes mutations in
associated with either osteoporosis or syndrome of increased bone mass.
Indeed,the ideas regarding the control of bone formation were
significantly revised after the discovery of sclerostin, the protein
produced by the sost gene. In bones, it is produced primarily by
osteocytes and strongly inhibits bone formation by inhibiting Wnt
signaling. [15-16].
References:
1.
Popescu SM, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1439
2.
Dăguci L, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:1
3.
Dăguci C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:401
4.
Răescu M, et al. Environ Eng Manag J 2010; 9:1521
5.
Voinea Georgescu, R et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:13
6.
Tonescu IG, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:138
7.
Cenușoiu A, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:57
8.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
9.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
10.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
11.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
12.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
13.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
14.
Gheorghiță LM, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:216
15.
Cotocel CC, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1053
16.
Nechita D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1059
P648
OSTEOPOROSIS AND GINGIVAL INFLAMMATION
S.-A. Preda1, G. Mitroi2, L.-E. Stoica3, A. Camen4, M.-R. Mitroi5, N.
Ionovici6, A. Boicea6, F. Nechita7, D.-M. Albulescu8, A.- Enescu8, M.-J.
uculina9
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Urology,
3University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of Dermatology
Clinic, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of Oral &
Maxillofacial Surgery, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Otorhinolaryngology, 6University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Medicine and Professional Diseases, 7University of Medicine &
Pharmacy Dept. of Medical Psychology, 8University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Anatomy9University of Medicine & Pharmacy of
Craiova, Faculty of Dental Medicine, Craiova, Romania
Objective: The present study starts from the hypothesis that in chronic
marginal periodontitis a major role is represented by general systemic
factors, such as osteoporosis (OP), menopause being the most common.
Although the involvement of osteoporosis in the alteration of the marginal
periodontium is relatively little studied in the literature, some studies have
shown that there are clinical and etiopathogenetic correlations between
them, the presence of osteoporosis inducing severe forms of periodontitis,
the most common form being dystrophic periodontitis. [1-9].
S320
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: The case study is represented by 42 patients, with age between
42-75 y. These patients were divided into two groups: a group with
osteoporosis and periodontitis comprising 25 patients and a control group
with 17 patients without osteoporosis and periodontitis. On patients
included in the study, the oral cavity examination was performed by a
dentist. We assessed the gingival index inflammation (GI).Evaluation of
BMD in order to establish the diagnosis of osteopenia/osteoporosis was
performed by DXA and we evaluated the values of the T-score.
Results: Both osteoporosis and periodontal disease are destructive bone
diseases. We calculated the correlation coefficients and the correlations
between the parameters of osteoporosis and periodontal indices on the
group with osteoporosis and periodontal disease, but also on the control
group. Comparing the groups with osteoporosis and periodontal disease
and without osteoporosis and periodontal disease we observed a highly
significant correlation between BMD and GI, which means that the bone
mass density is a predictor for the gingival inflammation index.
Conclusion: The association between osteoporosis and periodontal
disease has been reported in several studies, but this association has not
yet been confirmed, as these studies have contradictory results and the
relationship remains unclear. Given that the study was limited and was
conducted on a small group of patients for a good understanding of the
correlations between the two systemic diseases, longitudinal studies on
much larger groups are needed. [7-16].
References:
1.
Popescu SM, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1439
2.
Dăguci L, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:1
3.
Dăguci C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:401
4.
Răescu M, et al. Environ Eng Manag J 2010; 9:1521
5.
Voinea Georgescu, R et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:13
6.
Tonescu IG, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:138
7.
Cenușoiu A, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:57
8.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
9.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
10.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
11.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
12.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
13.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
14.
Gheorghiță LM, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:216
15.
Cotocel CC, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1053
16.
Nechita D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1059
P649
FRAGILITY FRACTURES ARE A LEADING REASON FOR
EMERGENCY HOSPITAL ADMISSION AND A LARGE
ILLNESS BURDEN IN IRELAND
D. O'Sullivan1, J. Carey2, B. McGowan3, E. Doherty4, S. O'Higgins5, B.
Whelan6, C. Silke6, M. O'Sullivan6, A. Gsel2, F. Heaney2, C.
Armstrong2, B. Connaughton2, N. Harrington7, S. Walsh5, B. McGuire5
1School of Medicine, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway,
2Dept. of Rheumatic Diseases, Galway University Hospital, Galway,
3Dept. of Rheumatic Disease Sligo and Manorhamilton University
Hospitals, Sligo, 4Dept. of Health Economics, National University of
Ireland Galway, Galway, 5Centre for Pain Research, National
University of Ireland Galway, Galway, 6Dept. of Rheumatic Diseases
Sligo and Manorhamilton University Hospitals, Sligo, 7Dept. of
Rheumatic Disease Sligo and Manorhamilton University Hospitals,
Leitrim, Ireland
Objective: Identify and compare total numbers of hospitalised patients,
length of stay and annual bed days of patients diagnosed with
osteoporotic hip and forearm fractures and other common diagnoses.
Methods: Data on the 17 most frequently coded diagnoses for emergency
admissions to public hospitals in the Republic of Ireland between 2010-
2016 were extracted using ICD-10 coding from the Hospital In Patient
Enquiry system. Data was extracted by one author (BMcG). Extracted
data included number of admissions, hospital bed days and mean length
of stay.
Results: A total of 946,217 admissions accounting for 6,044,055 bed
days occurred between 2010-2016. The most frequent diagnostic groups
were cardiovascular disease, infection, regional pain, fractures and
miscellaneous. The single most frequently coded diagnosis was pain in
the throat and chest (13.4%), while fracture of the femur (3.1%) was the
least frequent. Fracture of the forearm ranked 15th (3.6%). Femoral
fractures had the longest mean length of stay at 17.6 d, followed by stroke
at 17.4 d, while fracture of the forearm ranked 14th at 2.7 d. Femoral and
forearm fractures accounted for 10% of total bed days.
Conclusion: Fragility fractures are a common reason for acute public
hospital admission in the Republic of Ireland and account for a large
proportion of hospital bed days.
Disclosure: J Carey served on several committees for, taught courses for,
and Past-President of The International Society for Clinical
Densitometry, is a member of The Committee for Scientific affairs for
The International Osteoporosis Foundation, and is a founding member of,
and current president of The Irish DXA Society.
P650
Y NEUROPEPTIDE AND BONE HOMEOSTASIS
S.-A. Preda1, M.-J. uculina2, L.-E. Stoica3, N. Ionovici4, A. Boicea4, F.
Nechita5, D.-M. Albulescu6, A.- Enescu6, G. Mitroi7
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of
Dermatology Clinic, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Medicine and Professional Diseases, 5University of Medicine &
Pharmacy Dept. of Medical Psychology, 6University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Anatomy, 7University of Medicine & Pharmacy,
Dept. of Urology, Craiova, Romania
NPY-immuno-reactive fibers were identified in bone tissue some time
ago, associated with blood vessels. This anatomical location led to the
presumption that the role of NPY in vasoregulation is inside the spinal
cord. In its role as a critical mediator of homeostasis, NPY responds to
serum leptin changes in hypothalamus. Thus, the identification of
centrally mediated skeletal effects when leptin signaling changed
indicated the possibility of central action of NPY and was the first
investigated. [1-5].
The central actions of NPY on bone homoeostasis - The tightly integrated
biology of leptin and NPY inside hypothalamus made NPY earlier a
candidate for the central leptin pathway in the bone. Indeed, an
experiment showed that intracerebroventricular infusion of NPY in
wild-type mice produced a significant reduction in spongy bone volume
after the NPY viral vector specifically limited to the hypothalamus. [4-9].
S321
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
This bone loss was associated with a reduction the amount of minerals (up
to seven times), indicating an inhibition of osteoblastic activity on the
cortical and spongy surfaces, without a modification in the number of
osteoblasts or markers of bone resorption. In hypothalamus, NPY acts to
trigger responses to starvation; these include increased food consumption
and reduced energy expenditure. Thus, the continuous production of
NPY by the viral construct is perceived inside hypothalamus as a marker
of significant calorie deprivation, which triggers responses to hunger. [10-
13].
As a result, overexpression of NPY in mice led to a 60% increase in body
weight over 3 weeks, while bone mass (such as the tibia) was significantly
reduced. This result highlights the strong interactions between central
perceptions of nutritional status, such as increased NPY expression and
bone mass maintenance. Consistent with the central role of NPY in
inhibiting osteoblast activity, NPY-null mice show skeletal bone growth.
This increased bone mass results from an increase of mineral storage rate
in the cortical and spongy surfaces. This increase in osteoblastic activity is
supported by increased expression of osteogenic bone transcription
factor, RUNX2 and Osterix in the bone of NPY-null mice [14-16].
References:
1.
Popescu SM, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1439
2.
Dăguci L, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:1
3.
Dăguci C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:401
4.
Răescu M, et al. Environ Eng Manag J 2010; 9:1521
5.
Voinea Georgescu, R et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:13
6.
Tonescu IG, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:138
7.
Cenușoiu A, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:57
8.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
9.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
10.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
11.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
12.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
13.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
14.
Gheorghiță LM, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:216
15.
Cotocel CC, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1053
16.
Nechita D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1059
P651
I N F E C T I O N S U N D E R B I O T H E R A P Y D U R I N G
SPONDYLOARTHRITIS
R. Hassani1, M. Djennane1
1University Hospital Center of Tizi-ouzou, Dept. of Rheumatology, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria,
Objective: The use of biotherapies for almost 18 years has improved the
prognosis of several inflammatory diseases especially spondyloarthritis.
The tolerance of biotherapies depends on several factors including the
type of molecule used and the patient’s comorbitidies. Infection is one of
main complications of these biotherapies. This study aimed to study the
profile of infectious complications occurred in patients with
spondyloarthropathy receiving biological treatment (antiTNFα).
Methods: This is a descriptive retrospective study of patients with
spondyloarthropathy put under biological treatment over a period of 14
y (2005-2019). Collection of patient demographics: gender and age;
spondyloarthropathy type, type of biological therapy, duration of
treatment. Identify the type, specify the frequency and determine the
occurrence of interval infections in biological treatment.
Results: Of the 209 cases included, we found 25 infections in 21 patients
(10%) presented with at least one infection. They are divided into 14 men
and 7 women, mean age 47 y (25 – 67 y). 19 of them had an axial
spondyloarthritis, 16 mixed spondyloarthritis and one had psoriatic
arthritis. The occurrence of infections was 16 cases under adalimumab,
etanercept in 3 cases, 2 cases in infliximab. The patients were on
biological treatment for 3.5 y on average and the infection appears after
an average of 12 months (15 d - 36 months). The infection was bacterial
(60%), viral (28%), fungal (12%). Infections have concerned the
respiratory tract in more than half of the cases (64%) or 16 infections;
integumentary apparatus in 20% of cases and less frequently the urinary
and digestive systems. The treatment of infections was in all medical
cases. No appeal to the final adoption of biological treatment.
Conclusion: Our series confirms the susceptibility of patients on
biological therapy to infections. Officials infectious agents are primarily
and essentially opportunistic bacterial origin, dominated by lung
infections including tuberculosis and second skin infections. Decrease
the risk of infection through stock pre-systematic therapy and doctor-
patient vigilance imperative during treatment.
P652
DELAYED PERIAPICAL HEALING IN PATIENTS WITH
ENDOCRINE DISEASES
M.-J. uculina1, S.-A. Preda2, L.-E. Stoica3, M.-R. Mitroi4, G. Mitroi5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of
Dermatology Clinic, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Otorhinolaryngology, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Urology, Craiova, Romania
Objective: To highlight the coronoradicular and periodontal
modifications that may occur over time in teeth that have undergone a
history of endodontic treatment, and the identification of various risk
factors that contribute to the healing of periapical lesions. Among the
factors incriminated in the delayed healing of periapical lesions we can
note the presence of endocrine diseases and diabetes [1-7].
Methods: In order to follow the dental and periodontal modifications of
the teeth that underwent an endodontic treatment, a retrospective study
was performed. Were analyzed 320 retroalveolar, isometric, orthoradial
radiographs. Radiographs were analyzed by negatoscope. The teeth on
these radiographs were divided into two groups. Group 1 includes 210
teeth in patients with endocrine diseases and diabetes, who have
endodontic treatments, with a total of 306 channels. The radiographs were
performed 6 months to 3 y after the canal fillings. Group 2 includes 110
teeth, with endodontic treatment, in patients without endocrine disorders.
The teeth from both groups were evaluated in terms of coronoroot and
apical periodontium modifications. During the coronoradicular
modifications we followed the coronary and radicular fractures, the caries
recurrences and the secondary caries, the radicular resorptions. In the
apical periodontium changes we referred to the presence of widening of
the periradicular space in a cap form (radiological image of chronic
fibrous apical periodontitis), the presence of granulomas and cysts.
Conventionally, the radiolucency image over 0.5 cm was considered a
cyst, and below 0.5 cm granuloma. On the other hand, we also analyzed
the correctness of the root fillings, with reference to their length and
tightness. The canal obturation was considered incomplete if it ended
more than 2 mm from the radiological apex, correct, at 0-2 mm from
the radiological apex or with excess if the obturator material passed
beyond the radiological apex (according to the criteria of the European
Society of Endodontics). The root filling was considered tight if it had a
uniform density, without porosity and free spaces.
Results: The dental status of endodontically treated teeth was both dental
restoration by filling and prosthetic restoration by metal-ceramic
microprostheses. In terms of the frequency of secondary caries, the
difference between the two groups is not significant. Also, the coronary
fracture did not show a significant difference in the two groups. With a
S322
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
significant difference, it was found that periapical healing was much
delayed in patients with endocrine disorders, but also diabetes.
Conclusion: The number of endodontically treated teeth that require
endodontic reintervention is high. The quality level of endodontic
treatments is low. The frequency of chronic apical periodontitis in teeth
with endodontic treatment is high. Periapical healing has been delayed in
teeth of patients with endocrine disorders. [8-16].
References:
1.
Popescu SM, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1439
2.
Dăguci L, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:1
3.
Dăguci C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:401
4.
Răescu M, et al. Environ Eng Manag J 2010; 9:1521
5.
Voinea Georgescu, R et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:13
6.
Tonescu IG, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:138
7.
Cenușoiu A, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:57
8.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
9.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
10.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
11.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
12.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
13.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
14.
Gheorghiță LM, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:216
15.
Cotocel CC, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1053
16.
Nechita D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:1059
P653
THE PREVALENCE OF NECARIOUS CAVITY LESIONS ON
PATIENTS WITH ENDOCRINE DISEASES
M.-J. uculina1, S.-A. Preda2, L.-E. Stoica3, G. Mitroi4, M.-R. Mitroi5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of
Dermatology Clinic, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Urology,
5University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Otorhinolaryngology, Craiova, Romania
The loss of hard dental tissue in the absence of bacterial action is a
multifactorial condition that causes dental wear, with one of its known
forms of attrition, erosion or abrasion. Attrition is a physiological dental
wear, caused by direct contact between the teeth, abrasion is wear caused
by a mechanical/frictional process, and erosion is the dissolution of the
tooth caused by a chemical process. [1-7].
In our study, there was an increased prevalence of gastroesophageal
reflux disease in patients with endocrine diseases. As a result of
gastroesophageal reflux, the teeth are continuously subjected to an acid
action that causes a marked erosion of the tooth surfaces. [6-9].
We also noticed an increased prevalence of damage to the occlusal
surfaces, as well as the teeth in the lateral area, characteristic of
gastroesophageal reflux.
Erosive dental lesions were characterized either by a loss of surface gloss
highlighted in clean and dry enamel, or by the appearance of typical
yellow areas on the tooth surface, caused by exposure of the dentin
underlying the enamel thinned by the action of acids. [10-14].
The management of these teeth involved coronary restoration with
composite fillings, but also devitalization of teeth with increased
hypersensitivity, followed by a prosthetic restoration.
References:
1.
Popescu SM, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1439
2.
Dăguci L, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:1
3.
Dăguci C, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:401
4.
Răescu M, et al. Environ Eng Manag J 2010; 9:1521
5.
Voinea Georgescu, R et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2020;12:13
6.
Tonescu IG, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:138
7.
Cenușoiu A, et al. Rom J Oral Rehab 2021;13:57
8.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
9.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
10.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
11.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
12.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
13.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
14.
Harza M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:123
P654
HORMONAL FACTORS, RISK FACTORS IN THE
APPEARANCE OF BRUXISM
M.-J. uculina1, S.-A. Preda2, G. Mitroi3, M.-R. Mitroi4, L.-E. Stoica5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Urology,
4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Otorhinolaryngology, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova,
Dept. of Dermatology Clinic, Craiova, Romania
Objective: The etiology of bruxism is not fully known, most likely
involving many factors in the mechanism of production. The risk factors
are complex in nature, initially being incriminated morphological factors
(occlusion modifications with premature occlusal contacts or occlusal
interferences in maximum intercuspation).However, depressive states,
vitamin D deficiencies or hormonal modifications can influence the
appearance and treatment of bruxism. [1-5].The management of bruxism
involves a multidisciplinary effort, based on the causal factors
identification and the application of a targeted therapy, taking into
account as many aspects of each individual. Among management
possibilities is included occlusal adjustments (coronoplasty), orthodontic
interventions (performed with occlusal splints, correction of
malocclusions), restorative treatment (pulp therapy followed by coverage
crowns), psychotherapy (due to frequent association with stress and
depression), physiotherapy (when muscle pain and stiffness are
associated), drugs (anti-anxiety agents, sedatives, tranquilizers, muscle
relaxants), biofeedback (to lower muscle tension), electrical methods
(electrogalvanic stimulation), behavioral changes. [4-9].
Methods: The study included a number of 146 patients with various
hormonal disorders and 62 patients with vitamin D deficiency. The
patients were consulted in a dental office during 2017-2020.Patients also
benefited from an ENT, neurological, ophthalmological consultation.
Results: The oro-dental clinical examination highlighted the
characteristic dental facets of wear, pain of the lifting muscles of the
mandible, muscle tension, myofascial pain, clicks at the temporo-
mandibular joint, trismus. ENT clinical examination showed an increased
frequency of patients with tinnitus, ear pain, ear infections or apnea. From
a neurological point of view, bruxism determined the appearance of
constant headache, temporary pain, insomnia, with the consequent
presence of anxiety, depression, vertigo and stress. Patients with bruxism
showed hypersensitivity to light, orbital or periorbital pain, but also
difficulty accommodating vision.
Conclusion: Hormonal factors and vitamin D deficiency can cause
significant modifications in the body, which causes a combination of
factors that promote the appearance of bruxism. [10-13].
References:
1.
Răescu M, et al. Environ Eng Manag J 2010; 9:1521
S323
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
2.
Andreescu CF, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2013;54(Suppl
3):811
3.
Bechir ES, et al. Mater Plast 2019;56:964
4.
Bechir ES, et al Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:3176
5.
Bechir ES, et al Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:3565
6.
Bătăiosu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:77
7.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
8.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
9.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
10.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
11.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
12.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
13.
Harza M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:123
P655
COMPARISON OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE DISEASE
ACTIVITY INDICES AND ULTRASOUND SIGNS ON
RADIOLOGICAL PROGRESSION IN PATIENTS WITH
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
A. Volkov1, O. Alekseeva1, A. Smirnov1, A. Demina1
1Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the most common chronic
inflammatory arthritis. Its prognosis has improved substantially due to
the appearance of biological therapies, and especially due to the
improvement in the strategy and management of the disease. The goal
in RA should be to achieve remission, as it is widely accepted, would
prevent structural and functional damage. There is some debate and
controversy as there are different opinions on the influence of disease
activity used indexes, both clinical and by ultrasonography, on
radiological progression. This study aimed to compare the influence of
disease activity by indices (DAS28, SDAI, and CDAI) and ultrasound
signs (greyscale (GS) and presents of power Doppler (PD) signal) on
radiological progression in patients with rheumatoid arthritis
Methods: 85 RA pts, mean age 53,0 [44,0; 61,0] y, mean disease
duration 8 [4; 24] months were treated by treat-to-target concept. After
the first year of therapy, management was following real clinical practice
rules until the termination of the study (4 y FUP). The wrist, MCP2 and
MCP3, PIP2, PIP3, MTP2, and MTP5 joints of the clinically dominant
side were examined by US (GS and PD). Clinical, laboratory parameters,
and US examination were performed at baseline, at Mo 3, 6, 9, and 12.
The X-ray was conducted before treatment, at 12 Mo, and the end of the
study. Structural damage progression was evaluated by change in the
Sharp van der Heijde score (its subcomponents, the erosion score)
between baseline and 4 y. The effect of clinical indices and ultrasound
signs determined at different follow-up times on radiological progression
was analyzed. Descriptive statistical methods and the Cox regression
model were used.
Results: 13% of patients had radiological progression by the first year of
follow-up, 39% by the fourth year. Cox regression model showed that
clinical disease activity accordingly DAS28 and SDAI at 3 months,
associated with 4-y X-ray progression (HR 1.28 (95%CI 1.01-1.63),
p=0.04, and 1.02 (95%CI 1.00-1.05), p=0.04, respectively). Ultrasound
signs (GS, PD, and their combinations) had no independent predictor
value. Ultrasound signs only in combination with clinical and laboratory
signs had such an effect. Presence of activity according to PD at the
baseline (HR 3.68 (95%CI 1.03-13.15), with SJC at the 9th month (HR
1.14 (95%CI 0.98-1.35) and ESR at the 6 months (HR 1.04 (95%CI 1.02-
1.07) of follow up increase the chance of detecting progression. This
model demonstrated acceptable significance: R2=0.60.
Conclusion: Thus, PD-synovitis with other US parameters had no
independent predictor value. PD-synovitis with other parameters (clinical
and laboratory) along with activity indices has a prognostic value for
increasing destructive radiographic changes in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis.
P656
STUDY ON THE INFLUENCE OF HORMONAL FACTORS AND
SYSTEMIC OSTEOPOROSIS IN PERIODONTAL DISEASE
PROGRESSION IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
M.-J. uculina1, S.-A. Preda2, G. Mitroi3, M.-R. Mitroi4, L.-E. Stoica5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Urology,
4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Otorhinolaryngology, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova,
Dept. of Dermatology Clinic, Craiova, Romania
Objective: The analyzing of the hypothesis that in marginal periodontitis
general systemic factors play an important role, such as osteoporosis
(PO), the most common being the postmenopausal [1-6].
Methods: The primary diagnosis of periodontal disease is based on
clinical examination, but also on radiological examination. The cases
included in the study were selected and monitored by the
Endocrinology Outpatient Clinic and the private dental office during
2016-2019. The study was performed on 25 patients, with age between
45-79 y. These patients were divided into two groups: a group with
osteoporosis and periodontitis (14 patients) and a control group without
osteoporosis and periodontitis(11 patients).
Results: Our study proved that there are clinical and etiopathogenetic
correlations between osteoporosis and altered marginal periodontium,
the presence of osteoporosis inducing severe forms of periodontitis, the
most common form being destructive periodontal disease. The clinical
study showed a shiny, dry, pale or erythematous gum with bleeding at
touch. Radiological examination revealed a representative loss of alveolar
bone.
Conclusion: Hormonal modifications on postmenopausal women are
involved in the onset and evolution of periodontal disease [7-11].
References:
1.
Bechir ES, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:3176
2.
Dăguci L, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:449
3.
Bechir ES, et al. Mater Plast 2019;56:964
4.
Bechir ES, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:3176
5.
Bechir ES, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:3565
6.
Bătăiosu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:77
7.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
8.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
9.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
10.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
11.
Harza M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:123
P657
L O N G T E R M S Y S T E M I C C O R T I C O S T E R O I D
EXPOSURE:ADVERSE EFFECTS
L.-E. Stoica1, M.-J. uculina2, M.-R. Mitroi3, G. Mitroi4, S.-A. Preda5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of Dermatology
Clinic, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Otorhinolaryngology, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
S324
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Urology, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, Craiova, Romania
The use of systemic corticosteroids represents a common practice
worldwide for the treatment of autoimmune diseases, including skin
conditions. However, the potential benefits of these medications are offset
by side effects that may occur after long-term use. Among the
dermatological diseases, we mention pemphigus vulgaris, the most
common and serious form of pemphigus. The classic skin rash consists
of the presence of large blisters, containing a serocitrin liquid, located on
the apparently healthy skin, without being preceded or accompanied by
annoying subjective symptoms. The appearance at the beginning is
monomorphic, the blisters converge, and later they break leaving large
denuded areas. Subsequently, the appearance of the eruption becomes
polymorphic, as the blisters are in different stages of evolution [1-3]. In
the absence of treatment, the rash tends to generalize, the general
condition of the patient worsens, associated with rapid weight loss, even
cachexia, digestive disorders, fever and even death in less than a year. The
main objectives of treatment are to stop the evolution of the disease, the
healing of skin and mucous lesions. Subsequently, the goal is to prevent
relapses and avoid side effects that may occur following systemic
corticosteroid therapy. We will present the most common side effects
following systemic corticosteroid therapy according to data from current
literature, along with their management strategies. Systemic
corticosteroid therapy currently remains the gold standard for the
treatment of pemphigus vulgaris. The limitations of this therapeutic
strategy are the common side effects, especially the negative impact on
the bone, the treatment itself being a source of complications. Finding a
replacement agent for long-term corticosteroid therapy remains a
controversial topic in the literature [4,5].
References:
1.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
2.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
3.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
4.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
5.
Harza, M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:123
P658
SUBCHONDRAL BONE MINERAL DENSITY IN SUBJECTS
WITH KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
N. Grygorieva1, N. Zaverukha1, M. Bystrytska1, V. Povoroznyuk1
1D. F. Chebotarev Institute of Gerontology NAMS of Ukraine, Kyiv,
Ukraine
Objective: For a long period of time osteoarthritis (OA) was known as a
primary disorder of articular cartilage, however more animal and human
studies confirm the importance of changes in the subchondral bone
structure. Development and progression of OA are associated with the
increased subchondral bone remodeling manifested by the changes in
BMD. The aim to study the subchondral BMD in patients with knee
osteoarthritis (KOA).
Methods: 48 women aged 48-76 y were included being divided into two
groups: 1st one of the subjects without OA of any localization or any other
illnesses or conditions that may influence the bone (control group, n=24,
average age 63.21±7.23 y), and 2nd group of patients with KOA (n=24,
average age 62.40±7.26 y, Kellgren-Lawrence grades II-III). The women
from both groups did not differ significantly in main anthropometrical
parameters and postmenopausal period duration. BMD of the total body
was measured using DXA. Subchondral BMD was analyzed on the areas
of the proximal tibia and distal femur by regional measurements.
Results: Our study showed significantly lower BMD on affected with
KOA compared to the intact lower extremity (LE) in patients with KOA
(0.897±0.103 vs. 0.928±0.087 g/cm2, p<0.05) however, in the control
group there were no differences between right and left LE. In patients
with KOA, the BMD of the intact LE did not differ from the control group
at the same time BMD of the affected lower extremity was by 11.1%
lower (0.897±0.103 vs. 0.997±0.132 g/cm2, p<0.05) compared to BMD
of the lower extremity from the control group.
In patients with KOA, the subchondral distal femoral and proximal tibia
BMD was significantly lower on affected LE (0.735±0.119 vs. 0.765
±0.101 g/cm2, p<0.05, and 0.746±0.129 vs. 0.802±0.121 g/cm2, p
<0.05, respectively) unlike the control group where was no differences
detected. The difference was more pronounced at the level of the
proximal tibia and was equal to 7.5%.
Conclusion: The current study showed significant differences in LE
BMD and subchondral BMD of the proximal tibia/distal femur between
affected and intact LE in the patients with KOA that reflect the important
changes in bone mineral parameters.
P659
PSEUDOTUMORAL SWELLING OF THE RIGHT SHOULDER
RELATED TO RHEUMATOID SYNOVITIS
S. Yanis1, H. Houda1, C. Hayet2, B. Ryma1, D. Chafia1
1Rheumatology Dept. Mohamed Lamine Debaghine Hospital,
2Orthopedic Dept. Djilali Bounaama Hospital, Alger, Algeria
Objective: Rheumatoid synovitis is an inflammation of the synovial
membrane, often found in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the management
of which has been improved since the advent of biotherapy and new
therapeutic strategies. However, certain clinical forms are potentially
confused with osteoarthritis or a tumoral condition. In this case, we report
a particular form of pseudo-tumoral synovitis of the shoulder in a patient
with RA.
Case report: Mr B.F., 50 years old, has had rheumatoid arthritis for 15 y,
treated by methotrexate at 15 mg/week with partial response. The patient
presented with synovial hypertrophies affecting several joints (MCP, PPI,
wrists and ankles) for which he underwent surgical management
(synovectomies and tenosynovectomies). Clinical examination found a
significant painful swelling on the anterior part of the right shoulder with
limitation of movements, we note the presence of several surgical scars on
the hands, wrists and ankles. General examination: no lymphadenopathy,
no obvious infection or general signs. The biological assessment: without
abnormalities, ESR=25 mmh1, CRP=14 mg/. The right shoulder X-ray:
thickening of the soft parts next to the shoulder. Ultrasound of the right
shoulder shows a heterogeneous mass measuring 35/173/154 mm
corresponding to inactive synovitis. MRI of the right shoulder: significant
hypertrophy of the synovium within the bursa under acromio deltoid in
the form of hypertrophy of the synovial villi largely filling the lumen of
the bursa giving an enlargement of the latter (35/173/154mm). The
patient was referred to surgery for total synovectomy for which the
histological study found an inflammatory infiltrate (lymphocytes, plasma
cells, polynuclear neutrophils and monocytes) placed on a background of
fibrin organized in the form of a body of rice. in connection with
rheumatoid arthritis.
Conclusion: This observation highlights a particular form of synovitis
seen during RA (pseudotumoral form) requiring surgical management.
P660
PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS: CASE REPORT
L.-E. Stoica1, M.-J. uculina2, M.-R. Mitroi3, G. Mitroi4, S.-A. Preda5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of Dermatology
Clinic, 2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Otorhinolaryngology, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Urology, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, Craiova, Romania
S325
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Pemphiguses are autoimmune bullous diseases that result from the
alteration and disappearance of interkeratinocytic cohesion following
the action of autoantibodies on desmosomes. Pemphigus vulgaris is the
most common and most serious form of pemphigus. It affects both sexes
equally and is common, especially in people aged 50-70 y, but can begin
at any age. The etiopathogenesis of pemphigus is a complicated process
still under study [1-4].
We will present the clinical case of a 64-year-old patient who was
hospitalized in the Craiova Dermatovenerology Clinic in June 2020 for
a polymorphic itchy, painful rash consisting of multiple erosions and
crusts, located on the scalp, back and submammary regions. The first
presentation of the patient was in 2014, with multiple large bullous
lesions, crusts and postbullous erosions spread throughout the body.
Following the histopathological examination, the diagnosis of pemphigus
vulgaris was established. The patient underwent treatment with
methylprednisolone 250 mg/d, for 3 d, with good clinical response.
Subsequently, the dose was progressively reduced to 8 mg/d as
maintenance treatment. Over time, the patient suffered numerous relapses
despite systemic corticosteroid therapy, relapses that received the same
treatment with the progressive decrease of the dose as at the initial
hospitalization. During this period (2014-2020) the patient developed
asthma (2014), type 2 diabetes (2017), cataracts (2018), osteoporosis
(2019) following systemic corticosteroid therapy. To be mentioned, the
patient suffered from primary hypertension (2008) and glaucoma (2013).
In 2020, a new episode of recurrence with rapid spread of lesions, and due
to comorbidities it was no longer possible to use pulse-corticotherapy.
Methotrexate 10 mg prefilled syringe was administered (3
administrations, 1 administration/week), with a favorable outcome.
After this episode, the patient continued with the maintenance dose of
8 mg oral methylprednisolone/d.
Pemphigus vulgaris, requires long-term, low-dose corticosteroid therapy.
Despite the low doses, the negative impact on patients persists. Moreover,
in the case of these autoimmune diseases, where treatment options are
limited, these treatment strategies appear to be ineffective. Thus, the
risk/benefit ratio should be considered when approaching a systemic
corticosteroid regimen and other therapeutic options are worth trying
[5-6].
References:
1.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:827
2.
Pătrașcu V, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol2010;51:171
3.
Pirici I, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55(Suppl 2):675
4.
Nacea JG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:195
5.
Dincă D, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2019;60:255
6.
Ștefănescu M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1393
P661
HIGH TIBIAL OSTEOTOMY BY HEMICALLOTASIS USING
DYNAMIC AXIAL FIXATOR: RADIOLOGICAL PRECISION
AND FUNCTIONAL OUTCOME
V. Khanna1, M. Parihar2, A. Yadav3
1Dept. of Orthopaedics, Kailash Hospital, Khurja, 2Dept. of
Orthopaedics, Mangal Anand Hospital, Mumbai, 3Dept. Of
Orthopaedics, Grant Medical College & Sir JJ Group Of Hospital,
Mumbai, India
Objective: Medial compartment osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee has been
seen as the initial stage of OA in the majority of cases. Isolated cases of
medial compartment OA do not warrant extensive surgery such as Total
knee replacement but rather high tibial osteotomies. Conventional
techniques using internal fixation may lead to overcorrection due to the
dynamic component of malalignment. The long-term functional outcome
following surgery depends on the precision of correction of alignment.
This study has assessed the precision of correction of alignment using
dynamic axial fixator along with a 3 y functional follow-up.
Methods: We report the outcome of 45 patients (50 knees) who
underwent hemicallotasis with a dynamic axial fixator for medial
compartment OA of the knee. The radiological assessment was done with
the help of the hip-knee-ankle (HKA) angle. The functional scoring was
done via IKDC, Oxford knee score, WOMAC, and KOOS score.
Results: The mean follow-up was 3 y. Preoperatively mean HKA angle
was 173±3º, whereas postoperative mean HKA angle was 184±3º. Target
correction of HKA angle was achieved in 45 of 50 patients (90%).
Whereas, there was under correction in 3 patients (6%) and
overcorrection in 2 (4%) patients. There was a significant improvement
in the postoperative functional score as compared to the preoperative
scoring. A positive correlation was seen between the HKA angle and
the functional scores. Complications like superficial pin tract infection
were seen in 3 (6%) patients, deep infection in 1 (2%), and early union
of osteotomy in 1 (2%) patient leading to undercorrection.
Conclusion: Precision is of utmost importance while correcting the
alignment in HTO. The presence of a dynamic component of
malalignment may lead to suboptimal alignment postoperatively. The
use of a dynamic axial fixator helps in achieving calculated correction
with low complication rates along with no residual implant in the knee
postcorrection.
P662
CHARACTERISTICS OF IMBALANCE OF ANTIENDOTOXIN
IMMUNITY IN PATIENTS WITH SYSTEMIC LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS AND ITS INFLUENCE ON PERSISTENT
SYSTEMIC INFLAMMATION
D. Shaduro1, V. Beloglazov2, V. Kaliberdenko1, S. Kulanthaivel3, K.
Balasundaram4, K. Ostrovskyy5
1Dept. of Internal Medicine No.2, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal
University, Simferopol, Russia, 2Dept. of Internal Medicine No.2, V.I.
Vernadsky Crimean Federal University, Simferopol, Russia, 3Divisional
Health (Zone-6, Division-67), Greater Chennai Corporation - Public
Health and Medical Services Dept., Chennai, India, 4Dept. of Internal
medicine No.2, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal University,
Simferopol, Russia, 5Pharmaceutical Product Development, Warsaw,
Poland
Objective: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is one of the most severe
autoimmune inflammatory diseases of the connective tissue which causes
mortality. This study aimed to study the imbalance of antiendotoxin
immunity in patients with SLE and its influence on the persistent systemic
inflammation
Methods: We have examined 48 patients who were diagnosed with SLE
I-II degree with an average age of 36.4±1.8 y. And control group consisted
of 40 healthy volunteers. According to the degree of disease activity
patients were divided into two groups: I degree- 41.7%, II degree -
58.3%. The study of blood samples was carried out by means of blood
cold chain and antiendotoxin antibody of classes A, M and G (anti-LPS-
IgA, anti-LPS-IgM and anti-LPS-IgG respectively) was determined by
ELISA. The amount of C-reactive protein (CRP) in the blood serum was
determined by "sandwich" variant ELISA using biotin streptavidin system
of signal amplification. To estimate the amount of endogenous
intoxication (EI) we determined the average weight molecules which were
evaluated by the ultraviolet absorption spectrum in protein-free fractions of
blood serum. Circulating immune complexes (CIC) were determined by
precipitation method in 4.2% solution of polyethylene glycol.
Results: Patients with SLE demonstrated a drastic increase in titer of
specific anti-LPS-IgG index and EI, on the background values of the
normative anti-LPS-IgA and IgM, which indicate the chronic endotoxic
aggression. The observed correlations between specific anti-LPS-IgG on
the one hand and CRP and CIC on the other hand, confirm the association
S326
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
of imbalance of antiendotoxin immunity to systemic inflammation in
patients with SLE. So we can assume that the imbalance of humoral
antiendotoxin immunity has a significant role in maintenance of
autoimmune lupus inflammation. The high levels of CIC, CRP,
molecular average weight (EI) are the combined results of both
autoimmune process and endotoxemia which contribute to the target
organ damage which worsens the clinical course of SLE.
Conclusion: Elimination of LPS, the normalization of the intestinal
bioflora and strengthening the barrier function of the mucous membranes
is a new priority and pathogenetically recommended direction in treating
SLE.
P663
FRACTURE RATES AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES BY AGE
GROUPS IN PATIENTS WITH OSTEOPOROSIS RECEIVING
RISEDRONATE GASTRO-RESISTANT (GR) VS. IMMEDIATE
RELEASE BISPHOSPHONATES (IRB): A CLAIMS DATA
ANALYSIS
F. Thomasius1, S. Palacios2, A. Alam3, M. Boolell3, F. Vekeman4, G.
Gauthier4
1Frankfurter Hormon und Osteoporosezentrum, Frankfurt, Germany,
2Palacios’ Institute of Women’s Health, Madrid, Spain, 3Theramex,
London, UK, 4STATLOG, Montreal, Canada
Objective: To compare fracture rates and economic outcomes between
women with osteoporosis treated with risedronate GR vs. IRB.
Risedronate GR can be taken with food and has a higher oral
bioavailability‡ than IRB.
Methods: Women with osteoporosis were selected from a large US
claims database (2009-2019). The index date was the first dispensing date
for an oral bisphosphonate. Patients were classified into the GR or IRB
cohort based on the treatment initiated on that date and matched 1:1 based
on demographic and clinical characteristics. Patients were observed for
≥2 y following the index date. Incidence rates (IRs) of fractures and
healthcare resource utilization per 1000 patient-years were compared
between the two cohorts using IR ratios (IRRs). Outcomes were assessed
overall and by age group (< 65 y, ≥65 y and ≥75 y).
Results: The 2726 patients in each cohort (median age: 60.0 y) were
observed for 4.5 y on average. The IR of fractures was significantly lower
in the GR cohort vs. the IRB cohort for any fracture sites (GR: 34.65,
IRB: 42.13; IRR=0.83, p<0.05) and spine fractures (GR: 10.84, IRB:
15.13; IRR=0.71, p<0.05). Results remained consistent across
stratifications by age group (Table). At each time point considered over
the observation period, the rate of incident fracture was lower in the GR
cohort, reaching statistical significance at 36 months (fracture rate;
GR=7.08%; IRB=8.67%, p=0.037). The IR of hospitalizations was lower
in the GR vs. the IRB cohort (GR: 106.74, IRB: 124.20; IRR=0.86,
p<0.05) leading to significantly lower hospitalization costs among GR
patients (average per-patient-per-year; GR: $3,611; IRB: $4,603,
p<0.05).
Conclusion: Women with osteoporosis had a lower incidence of fractures
when they are treated with risedronate GR compared to IRB. These
results are consistent with the hypothesis that the bioavailability and
therefore the efficacy of risedronate GR is independent of food intake
and is higher than IRB.
Table.
N
IR GR
IR IRB
IRR (95%CI)
All
2,726
34.65
42.13
0.83 (0.70 – 0.97) *
< 65 y
1,896
23.69
24.37
0.96 (0.75 - 1.24)
≥65 y
830
58.65
80.79
0.74 (0.60 - 0.91) *
≥75 y
392
81.22
102.84
0.80 (0.61 - 1.05)
‡Risedronate GR SmPC
*Significant at the 5% level
Acknowledgement: This study was funded by Theramex
Disclosure: F. Thomasius has received fees for lectures and consultancy
or investigator fees from Amgen, Gedeon Richter, Lilly, Hexal, Kyowa
Kirin, Hologic, Novartis, Stada, Synexus, Theramex, and UCB. S.
Palacios is a consultant for Pfizer, Amgen, MSD, Procare, Health,
Bayer, Besins, Sérélys Shinogi, Exeltis, Gedeon Richter, Theramex,
and UCB. A. Alam and M. Boolell are employees of Theramex. F.
Vekeman and G. Gauthier are employees of STATLOG, Inc., which
has received research funding from Theramex for this study.
P664
PLASMA RICH IN GROW FACTORS (PRGF) LONG TERM
TREATMENT EFFECTS IN BISPHOSPHONATE-RELATED
OSTEONECROSIS OF THE JAWS
A. Pătru1, E. Ciucă1, A. Boicea2, S.-A. Preda3, M.-J. uculina4, A. Camen1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Dept. of Oral &
Maxillofacial Surgery, Craiova, Romania, 2University of Medicine &
Pharmacy, Dept. of Medicine & Professional Diseases, 3University of
Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental Medicine,
4University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, Craiova, Romania
Prevention and treatment modalities for the patients with, or at risk of
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (BRONJ) are still
controversial and it have been changing over last few years.
Interrupting bisphosphonate therapy does not seem to be beneficial in
terms of time and can be used mostly in patient with osteoporosis. The
purpose of this presentation is to evaluate the long term therapeutical
effect of plasma rich in grow factors on bone healing in cases with
BRONJ after 18 months observation period after teeth extraction or others
oral surgery interventions. Biostimulant effects of PRGF add into bone
defects reduce the healing time and local pain immediately after oral
surgery. They improve the final reparative process of bone and mucosa,
increase inorganic matrix of bone and osteoblast mitotic index and
stimulate lymphatic and blood capillaries growth in the affected area.
PRGF could be one of the modality for BRONJ treatment, being safe
and well tolerated, and it permits the minimally invasive surgical
treatment like teeth extraction of early stages of the disease [1-8].
References:
1.
Mitroi M, et al. Mol Med Rep 2019;19:2792
2.
Ene CG, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:2108
3.
Dragoescu et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:1279
4.
Andronesi AG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2016;57:1125
5.
Rusescu A, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:642
6.
Salan AI, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2018;59:839
7.
Rauten AM, et al. J Immunol Res. 2016;2016:4072543
8.
Stoica LE, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2015;56(Suppl 2):827
P665
OSTEOPOROSIS IN PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC
RHINOSINUSITIS AND NASAL POLYPOSIS
M.-R. Mitroi1, S.-A. Preda2, M.-J. uculina3, D.-M. Albulescu4, A.
Căpitănescu1, G. Mitroi5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology,
2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Anatomy, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Urology,
Craiova, Romania
S327
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: To investigate the BMD in a group of patients with chronic
rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis (CRSwNP) with asthma [1-5].
Method: 24 adult patients with a diagnosis of CRSwNP, and a history of
at least one course of oral corticosteroids (OCS) during the last year, were
included in this study. The BMD of the patients was measured by DXA.
Results: During the last 12 months, the mean number of OCS courses
was 1.32. According to the t-scores, 11 patients were measured to have ≤-
1 SD t-score lumbar spine, which is considered to be osteopenia, and 3
patients had <-2.5 SD t-score, considered as osteoporosis.
Conclusions: This study shows that one moderate course of OCS
annually may be used without high risk of causing osteopenia/
osteoporosis in patients with CRSwNP [6-9].
References:
1.
Mitroi M, et al. Mol Med Rep 2019;19:2792
2.
Mitroi M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:1051
3.
Ene CG, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:2108
4.
Tsoukalas et al Metabolites 2020;10:502
5.
Musat G, et al. Mol Clin Oncol 2020;12:258
6.
Mitroi G, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:1319
7.
Andronesi AG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2016;57:1125
8.
Rusescu A, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:642
9.
Salan AI, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2018;59:839
P666
CHRONIC RHINOSINUSITIS WITH NASAL POLYPOSIS: NEW
THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES
M.-R. Mitroi1, S.-A. Preda2, M.-J. uculina3, D.-M. Albulescu4, A.
Căpitănescu1, G. Mitroi5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology,
2University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of Dental
Medicine, 3University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Faculty of
Dental Medicine, 4University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of
Anatomy, 5University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Dept. of Urology,
Craiova, Romania
Objective: Chronic rhinosinusitis associated with nasal polyposis
(CRSwNP) affects 4% of the general population. As a chronic condition,
it requires chronic pharmacological treatment [1-6]. Intranasal and
systemic corticosteroids (CS) represent the “gold standard” treatment
for CRSwNP. The present study aims to evaluate two treatment methods
in CRSwNP: topical corticosteroids and antistaphylococcal vaccine.
Methods: 28 adult patients with a diagnosis of chronic rhinosinusitis with
nasal polyposis were included in this study. 14 patients received treatment
with topical corticosteroid and the other 14 received antistaphylococcal
vaccine. The results were evaluated at 3 and 6 months. SNOT-22 test
results and nasal endoscopy were evaluated in all subjects.
Results: The group of patients who were treated with topical
corticosteroids had a notably improved score on the SNOT-22 test, as
well as a better endoscopic score compared to the group that received
vaccine treatment.
Conclusion: This study shows that intranasal corticosteroids treatment in
patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis is more effective
than administration of topical antistaphylococcal vaccine [4, 5, 7-13].
References:
1.
Mitroi M, et al. Mol Med Rep 2019;19:2792
2.
Mitroi M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2011;52:1051
3.
Ene CG, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:2108
4.
Constantin C, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:2401
5.
Musat G, et al. Mol Clin Oncol 2020;12:258
6.
Enescu AS, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:145
7.
Harza M, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2014;55:123
8.
Mitroi G, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2015;56:1319
9.
Andronesi AG, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2016;57:1125
10.
Gheorghiță MI, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2017;58:585
11.
Rusescu A, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:642
12.
Salan AI, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2018;59:839
13.
Șurlin P, et al. Ann Anat 2018;219:51
P667
ADVANTAGES OF STANDARDIZED PREOPERATIVE NERVE
BLOCK VS. CONVENTIONAL ANALGESIA IN ELDERLY
PATIENTS WITH HIP FRACTURE
C. M. Olarte1, A. M. López1, J. Tihanyi1, A. Libos1, S. Renza1, L.
Ricaurte2, A. F. Patiño1, D. C. Morales1, V. Sanint1, R. F. Pesantez1, J.
E. Salavarrieta1
1Hospital Universitario Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, 2Hospital Infantil
Universitario de San José, Bogotá, Colombia
Objective: To determine the advantages of preoperative nerve block vs.
conventional analgesia during hospital stay in elderly patients with hip
fracture. Additionally, to compare hospital opioid consumption between
patients with blockade and those with conventional analgesia as well as to
determine the risk factors associated with delirium.
Methods: A two-arm prospective cohort study was carried out with
ambispective data collection in patients 65 y or older treated for a fragility
fracture of the hip in two 4th level hospitals in Bogotá, Colombia.
Results: The study sample comprised a total of 218 patients of which 119
received conventional analgesic management and 99 fascia iliaca nerve
block. There was no relationship between blockage and development of
delirium, however, it was found that delirium was associated with older
age (p=0.010), admission to the ICU (RR=1.20, p=0.021), urinary tract
infection (RR=2.32, p=0.002) and respiratory failure (RR=3.05,
p=0.001). Patients without blockade presented a greater opioid
consumption compared to those who received blockade (27.61 vs.
16.34 mg, p=0.03), as well as a longer duration of surgery time (90.84
vs. 81.08 min, p=0.030) and hospital stay (6.06 vs. 5.41 d). Additionally,
it was found that the blockage acts as a protective factor to present
pressure ulcers (RR=0.76). Conclusion: In the present study, the cohort
who received preoperative nerve block showed a lower opioid
consumption, a shorter surgical time and hospital stay, which improves
the outcomes of orthogeriatric management and can positively influence
the functionality and future morbidity and mortality of these patients. On
the other hand, delirium is an important complication in elderly patients
with hip fracture that have multiple comorbidities, cognitive impairment,
and severe physiological stress. In this study, the preoperative nerve block
did not show a decrease in delirium, this may be associated with
confounding factors due to its multifactorial etiology and the size of the
sample collected.
P668
OSTEOPOROSIS RISK ASSESSMENT USING THE IOF AND
FRAX QUESTIONS AND OTHER FACTORS
A. Zayeava1, D. Shaduro1, E. Teifukova2, S. Kulanthaivel3, V.
Kaliberdenko1, K. Balasundaram4
1Dept. of Internal Medicine No.2, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal
University, Simferopol, Russia, 2Bakhchisaray Central Regional
Hospital, Bakhchisaray, Russia, 3Divisional Health (Zone-6, Division-
67), Greater Chennai Corporation - Public Health and Medical Services
Dept., Chennai, India, 4Dept. of Internal medicine No.2, V.I. Vernadsky
Crimean Federal University, Simferopol, Russia
Objective: Osteoporosis is a systemic metabolic disease of the skeleton,
characterized by an increased tendency to slightly traumatic bone fractures
due to a decrease in bone mass and impaired bone tissue quality [1]. Our
S328
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
objective was to study the data of scientific research on calciuria, to create
a questionnaire for questioning healthy and sick people with the aim of
preventing and treating osteoporosis, to conduct testing on patients, and to
study the prevalence of risk factors for osteoporosis in the population.
Methods: During the survey, in addition to the basic data, patients were
asked to answer the questions of the International Osteoporosis
Foundation (IOF) and fracture risk assessment tool (FRAX), and the
author's questionnaire was also presented to identify other factors. 100
patients were interviewed and their average age were 63±25 y.
Results: As a result of the survey, it was found that all respondents are at
risk by at least one criterion. 50% of the respondents noted a history of
pathological fractures, 25% took glucocorticoids in high concentrations,
and 11% suffered from rheumatoid arthritis, which significantly affects the
condition of the bones. Also, among women, a high risk of
postmenopausal osteoporosis was noted, as one in five women reported
early onset of menopause, interruptions in the menstrual cycle for more
than 12 months, and removal of appendages during their lifetime. Separate
attention should be paid to the identification of a strong positive correlation
(R=0.901; P <0.001) between the fracture suffered and regular walks or
vitamin D intake with a low average value of the second indicator.
Conclusion: It may be advisable to identify a large risk group using an
IOF survey, and then offer a BMD study and, therefore, a FRAX
questionnaire. The questionnaire we have developed allows us to expand
the range of identifying risk factors for osteoporosis and to identify high-
risk groups for early initiation of preventive measures.
Reference: 1. Popova-Petrosyan EV, et al. Current Women`s Health
Reviews 2020;16:26
P669
THE IMPACT OF POSTOPERATIVE HYPOPARATHYROIDISM
ON FRACTURES IN A TERRITORY-WIDE COHORT OF
ELECTIVE TOTAL THYROIDECTOMY FOR BENIGN
DISEASES: A 10-YEAR FOLLOW-UP
D. T. W. Lui1, M. M. H. Fung2, C. H. Lee1, C. H. Y. Fong1, Y. C. Woo1,
B. H. H. Lang2
1The University of Hong Kong, Dept. of Medicine, Queen Mary
Hospital, 2The University of Hong Kong, Dept. of Surgery, Queen
Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China
Objective: The low bone turnover state in hypoparathyroidism may have
potential deleterious effects on bone. Little is known about its impact on
fracture risk. As postsurgical hypoparathyroidism is the most common
cause of hypoparathyroidism, we assessed its impact on incident fracture
risk in a territory-wide cohort of patients who underwent elective total
thyroidectomy for benign pathologies.
Methods: All elective total thyroidectomies performed in 14 major
hospitals across the territory from 1995-2014 were analyzed using an
electronic health database. Permanent postsurgical hypoparathyroidism
(PPH) was defined by the requirement of oral calcium and calcitriol
shortly postoperatively and continued for ≥6 months. Those with
albumin-corrected calcium <1.90 mmol/L on ≥1 occasion beyond one
year post-operation were considered suboptimally controlled. Fractures
were identified by ICD9-CM codes 805 (vertebral), 812 (humeral), 813-
814 (wrist and forearm), and 820 (hip). Each patient was followed up
until an index fracture, death, or 31 May 2020, whichever was earlier.
Multivariable Cox regression analysis was used to identify clinical
predictors of fractures.
Results: Among 4123 eligible patients, 460 (11.2%) had PPH. Over a
median of 10.3 y, 126 patients suffered from an incident fracture (2.77 per
1000 person-years). The median time from thyroidectomy to fracture was
7.2 y. Fracture incidence did not differ between those with and without
PPH (2.89 vs. 2.76 per 1000 person-years, respectively, p=0.848). There
were no differences in fracture rates over upper extremities, lower
extremities and vertebrae between groups. Subgroup analyses according
to the adequacy of PPH control did not reveal significant differences in
fracture events. Age, history of fall, diabetes and baseline anti-depressant
use independently predicted post-thyroidectomy fractures.
Conclusion: PPH was not uncommon after elective total thyroidectomy.
We did not observe a significant difference in fracture risk between
patients with and without PPH. The impact of PPH control on fracture
risk remained to be determined. Nevertheless, clinicians should still take
care of the traditional clinical risk factors of osteoporosis which predicted
fractures in this post-thyroidectomy cohort.
P670
A COMPARISON OF CHANGES IN BONE TURNOVER
MARKERS AFTER ROUX-EN-Y GASTRIC BYPASS AND
SLEEVE GASTRECTOMY, AND THEIR ASSOCIATION
WITH MARKERS OF INTEREST: THE ABOS-OS STUDY
J. Paccou1, D. Thuillier2, M. Courtalin1, P. Pigny2, J. Labreuche2, B.
Cortet2, F. Pattou2
1Rheumatology, 2Lille University, Lille, France
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) but not sleeve gastrectomy (SG)
increases the risk of major osteoporotic fractures (MOF). However, it
remains unclear whether the same degree of high turnover bone loss is
associated with SG, which is now more common than RYGB. The aim of
this study was to compare changes in bone turnover markers (BTMs) after
RYGB and SG, and to investigate their association with pre-defined
markers of interest. An ancillary investigation of a prospective cohort
was conducted at a tertiary care center in France. SG patients with severe
obesity ≥40 y were matched one-to-one to RYGB patients (controls) for
age, sex, BMI and menopausal status. Bone turnover markers, as well as
predefined markers of interest (calciotropic hormones, total calcium,
insulin, sclerostin and adipokines), were measured at baseline, 12 and 24
months after bariatric surgery. Sixty-four patients (66% women) had a
mean (SD) age of 49.6 y (5.1) and a mean (SD) BMI of 45.0 kg/m²
(6.0). From baseline to 12 months, a significant increase in BTMs was
observed in both groups (p-values<0.001). Moreover, RYGB was
associated with a greater increase in C-terminal telopeptide (CTX) and
procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide (P1NP) compared to SG (p-
values<0.0001). From 12 to 24 months, a significant decrease in BTMs
was observed in both groups, but no significant differences were found
between RYGB and SG. However, BTMs did not return to baseline levels.
Thus, a high degree of bone turnover was maintained in both groups up to
24 months. The changes in P1NP and CTX at 12 months were
independently associated with the type of surgical procedure, after
adjusting for weight or each predefined marker of interest (all
p<0.0001). In conclusion, RYGB was associated with a greater increase
in BTMs than SG at 12 and 24 months. These findings may partly explain
the higher risk of MOF observed after RYGB.
S329
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P671
FEATURES OF BLOOD COUNTS IN RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS AND REACTIVE ARTHRITIS AND ADDITIONAL
POSSIBILITIES FOR DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
D. Shaduro1, V. Kaliberdenko1, S. Kulanthaivel2, K. Balasundaram3, R.
Mnevets4, I. Ostrovska5
1Dept. of Internal medicine No.2, V.I. Vernadsky Crimean Federal
University, Simferopol, Russia, 2Divisional (Zone-6, Division-67),
Greater Chennai Corporation - Public Health and Medical Services
Dept., Chennai, India, 3Dept. of Internal medicine No.2, V.I.
Vernadsky Crimean Federal University, Simferopol, Russia, 4ESC
Institute of Biology and Medicine of Taras Shevchenko National
University of Kyiv, Kyiv, Ukraine, 5Dept. of Therapy, Shevchenkivskyi
District Outpatient Dept. #2, Kyiv, Ukraine
Objective: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune rheumatic
disease of unknown etiology, characterized by the development of
chronic erosive arthritis (synovitis) and systemic inflammatory lesions
of internal organs. Reactive arthritis (ReA) - nonsuppurative "sterile"
inflammatory diseases of the musculoskeletal system, induced by
infections of extra-articular localization, primarily of the urinary or
intestinal tract. The differential diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis with
reactive arthritis (ReA) deserves special attention. This study aimed to
study the features of blood counts in rheumatoid arthritis and reactive
arthritis and its additional possibilities for differential diagnosis.
Methods: Study consist of 100 patients with two groups of 50 patients
each with RA and ReA. The average age of patients were 45±28 y. RA is
often accompanied by anemic syndrome. In the case of differential
diagnosis of RA and ReA, when detecting low hemoglobin levels, one
should think about rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, the phenomenon of
thrombocytopenia is characteristic of RA.
Results: From our data low hemoglobin levels and thrombocytopenia
were detected which is a characteristic of RA. Thee phenomena of
leukocytosis, eosinophilia, monocytosis, as well as a shift of the
leukocyte formula to the left were detected which is a characteristics of
reactive arthritis. With the manifestation of RA and a short duration of the
disease (up to 5 y), the level of A-CCP is low. The detection sensitivity of
the A-CCP method increases with the duration of the disease and rarely
reflects the presence of the disease, but rather determines the degree of its
activity. In the differential diagnosis of these diseases, one should pay
attention to the frequent synchronous and unidirectional increase in the
levels of ESR, CRP and seromucoids in cases of ReA. The high value of
RF and seromucoids in diseases accompanied by arthritis is more
evidence in favor of the diagnosis of RA, and, accordingly, excludes
the presence of reactive arthritis.
Conclusion: From the results, the features of the blood counts in the RA
and ReA are almost similar. But our study gives special distinctive
characteristics which provides a way for additional possibilities in
differential diagnosis and early treatment with prevention of
complications.
P672
HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE OF PATIENTS WITH
A RECENT FRACTURE AT FRACTURE LIAISON SERVICE: A
THREE-YEAR FOLLOW-UP STUDY
N. Li1, M. van Oostwaard2, J. van den Bergh2, M. Hiligsmann1, A.
Boonen3, S. van Kuijk4, L. Vranken2, S. Bours3, C. Wyers2
1Dept. of Health Services Research, CAPHRI Care and Public Health
Research Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 2Dept. of Internal
Medicine, VieCuri, Medical Centre, Venlo, 3Dept. of Internal Medicine,
Division of Rheumatology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, and
CAPHRI Research Institute, Maastricht, 4Dept. of Clinical Epidemiology
and Medical Technology Assessment, Maastricht University Medical
Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands
Objective: To estimate the 3-y health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of
patients with a recent fracture presenting at Fracture Liaison Service
(FLS) and to explore factors associated with health state utility value
(HSUV).
Methods: Data from a 3-y prospective observational study in patients
attending the FLS was used. Patients’ HSUVs were derived from the
EQ-5D-5L and SF-6D and calculated at six time-points: baseline, 3, 6,
12, 24, 36 months. Multiple imputation was applied for missing data.
Linear mixed-effects regression analysis with random intercept and slope
was applied to compare mean HSUV between baseline and each time
point, and to explore the course of HSUV over 3 y. A backward stepwise
elimination was applied to identify factors associated with HSUV.
Results: A total of 499 patients were included. The yearly change of
HSUV was not significant over 36 months (P=0.52) although the mean
HSUV at 6 months (mean difference (MD): 0.015, 95%CI: 0.002-0.029;
P=0.02) and 12 months (MD: 0.018, 95%CI: 0.004-0.032; P=0.01) were
slightly but significantly higher compared to baseline. There was no
significant difference in the course of HSUV between the predefined
ten fracture categories (P=0.86), but the HSUV of the combined group
of patients with femoral, vertebral or multiple fractures was 0.096 units
(P<0.001) lower compared to patients with other fractures. Subsequent
fracture, prevalent vertebral fracture, osteoporosis medication use, use of
walking aid, previous falls and BMI were identified factors associated
with EQ-5D HSUV. Comparable results were identified using SF-6D
HSUV.
Conclusion: The 3-y change in HSUV was not statistically significant
although significant improvements were observed at 6 and 12 months
compared to baseline. Six factors were negatively associated with EQ-
5D HSUV.
P673
ADMISSION OF HIP FRACTURE PATIENTS DURING COVID-
19 PANDEMIC: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
R. Lekamwasam1, B. Lekamwasam2, T. Abeygunasekara3, N.
Rathnayake3
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Colomb, Colombo, 2District General
Hospital, Hambantota, 3Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, University of
Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka
Objective: COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to control the
spread of virus led to changes that can potentially influence the disease
incidence and health seeking behavior of people. This systematic review
assessed the pattern of admission of hip fracture patients during the
pandemic.
Methods: The study was done adhering to the PRISMA guidelines. A
PubMed search was done on 17th May 2021 using keywords “COVID-
19” or “SARS-CoV-2” and “hip fracture”. Original studies published in
English language, related to hospital admissions were selected by two
authors independently. Discrepancies were resolved by consensus and
data were collected using a predetermined datasheet.
Results: The initial search returned 147 publications and 39 were related
to admission of incident hip fractures. Studies have compared admissions
during 2020 with previous years; 2019 and 2018. In general, there was a
significant reduction of admissions due to fractures/trauma but eight
studies reported no change in hip fracture admissions during pandemic
(Miranda,2021; Onizuka,2021; Nia,2021; Donovan,2020; Karia,2020;
Ogliari,2020; Yu,2020 and Nunez,2020). While two studies reported a
slight increase in the rate of hip fracture admissions (Dolci,2020 and
Pintado,2020) three studies reported a decrease in hip fracture admissions
during the pandemic (Zhong,2021; Vaishya,2021 and Park,2020). One
study reported a longer gap between the time of injury and hospital
admission (Jarvis,2021) while another found more males presenting with
hip fracture compared to females (Nazemi,2021).
Conclusion: The reduction of the total number of fractures is probably
related to less road traffic accidents and sport related injuries during
S330
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
pandemic. Hip fractures in old age which are mostly due to low energy
trauma occurring indoors have largely remained unchanged or slightly
increased despite movement restrictions during the pandemic.
P674
THE IMPACT OF THE FIRST NATION-WIDE COVID-19
LOCKDOWN ON HIP FRACTURES IN FRANCE: EVIDENCE
FROM A NATIONAL STUDY
J. Paccou1, X. Lenne2, G. Ficheur2, D. Theis2, B. Cortet2, A. Bruandet2
1Rheumatology, 2Lille University, Lille, France
The COVID-19 pandemic has posed a number of unprecedented
challenges to the healthcare system in France, where hip fractures in
the elderly population are a major public health concern. The aim of this
study was to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
absolute number of hip fractures in patients aged 50 y and older. Data
from the French National Hospital Database on hospitalizations for hip
fracture from January 1 to July 31, 2020 (study period), and from
January 1 to July 31, 2019 (control period) were classified by gender,
age group (50–59, 60–69, 70-79, 80-89, over 89 y) and hospital type.
During the first nation-wide lockdown (March 16, 2020 to May 10,
2020), COVID-19 had a notable effect on the absolute number of hip
fractures: 10,429 patients (75% women; mean age, 83.7 y) were
hospitalized, as opposed to 11,782 patients (74% women; mean age,
82.9 y) over the same period of time in 2019, with a corresponding
hospitalization rate ratio (HRR) of 0.89 ([95%CI, 0.86–0.91];
p<0.001). This decrease was observed both in women (-11%) and men
(-13%). When the absolute number of hip fractures were compared by
age groups, the decrease was observed in all age groups, except in
patients over 89 y (HRR=0.97 [95%CI, 0.92-1.01]; p=0.169). The
number of hip fractures decreased from 4925 to 4370 in the 80-89 years
age group (HRR=0.89 [95%CI, 0.85-0.92]; p<0.001). During the
lockdown, HRRs decreased by 33% (HRR=0.67 [95%CI, 0.85-0.92];
p<0.001) and 24% (HRR=0.76 [95%CI, 0.73-0.79]; p<0.001) in public
university hospitals and public general hospitals respectively, whereas
they increased by 46% (HRR=1.46 [95%CI, 1.38-1.54]; p<0.001) in
private hospitals. In conclusion, hospitalizations for hip fractures in
France fell by 11% during the first nation-wide COVID-19 lockdown.
Further studies are required to investigate the long-lasting consequences
of the COVID-19 pandemic on the incidence of osteoporotic fracture and
the management of osteoporosis.
P675
A HEAD-TO-HEAD COMPARISON OF EQ-5D-5L AND SF-6D IN
DUTCH PATIENTS WITH FRACTURES VISITING FRACTURE
LIAISON SERVICE
N. Li1, A. Boonen2, J. van den Bergh3, C. Wyers3, M. van Oostwaard3, S.
van Kuijk4, L. Vranken3, S. Bours2, M. Hiligsmann1
1Dept. of Health Services Research, CAPHRI Care and Public Health
Research Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 2Dept. of Internal
Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Maastricht University Medical
Centre, and CAPHRI Research Institute, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, 3Dept. of Internal Medicine, VieCuri, Medical Centre,
Venlo, 4Dept. of Clinical Epidemiology and Medical Technology
Assessment, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht,
The Netherlands
Objective: To explore the comparative performance of EQ-5D-5L and
SF-6D utilities including agreement, construct and longitudinal validity
for patients visiting a Fracture Liaison Service (FLS) after a recent
fracture.
Methods: Data from a 3-y prospective observational study of patients
aged over 50 y attending the FLS in the Netherlands were used. All
subjects were interviewed using a standardized questionnaire including
the EQ-5D-5L and SF-36 over a 3-y time period. Floor and ceiling effects
were evaluated by calculating the proportion of sample in the worst and
best possible health states. Agreement was evaluated by intraclass
correlation coefficients and Bland-Altman plots. Two aspects of construct
validity were assessed: convergent and known-groups validity.
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients were applied to assess
convergent validity, and Mann-Whitney U test or Kruskal-Wallis H test
was used to explore known-groups validity, effect size was also reported.
Longitudinal validity was explored using standardized response mean
and effect size.
Results: A total of 499 patients (mean age 64.6 y, 71.3% female) were
included. Baseline mean (median) EQ-5D-5L score was 0.813 (0.852),
and ceiling effect of 21.0%. Baseline mean SF-6D score was 0.766
(0.788), and ceiling effect of 1.2%. Both instruments yielded no floor
effect. Agreement between the EQ-5D-5L and the SF-6D was good with
ICC of 0.791 (95%CI: 0.707-0.846), however discrepancies were
indicated by the Bland-Altman plot. EQ-5D-5L and SF-6D index scores
were highly correlated with an overall Spearman correlation coefficient of
0.754. Moderate correlations were identified between domains. Both EQ-
5D-5L and SF-6D scores demonstrated statistically significant differences
in some known-groups (gender, fracture type, previous fall, osteoporosis
medication use). The responsiveness of both instruments to change in
health utility over 3 y was negligible/ trivial. EQ-5D-5L was however
relatively more responsive than SF-6D in most scenarios. SF-6D
appeared to be more responsive to detect changes for patients with
subsequent fracture during follow-up.
Conclusion: Both EQ-5D-5L and SF-6D are valid measures for patients
with a recent fracture. Even though these two measures had good
agreement, interchangeability could be questioned. Relatively moderate
correlation and similar evidence of discriminative validity were suggested
by both instruments in our patient population, however, no clear
conclusion could be made regarding which instrument is more effective
in detecting clinically relevant differences.
P676
BONE MINERAL DENSITY CHANGES BY GEOGRAPHIC
REGION IN WOMEN WITH ENDOMETRIOSIS TREATED
WITH RELUGOLIX COMBINATION THERAPY: RESULTS
FROM THE PHASE 3 SPIRIT PROGRAM
M. R. McClung1, R. Venturella2, F. Petraglia3, S. J. Imm4, R. B.
Wagman4, S. L. Ferrari5
1Oregon Osteoporosis Center, Portland, USA, 2Magna Graecia
University of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy, 3University of Florence,
Florence, Italy, 4Myovant Sciences, Inc., Brisbane, USA, 5Geneva
University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland
Objective: In the Phase 3, placebo-controlled SPIRIT 1/2 studies,
once-daily relugolix combination therapy (Rel-CT: relugolix 40 mg,
S331
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
estradiol 1.0 mg, norethindrone acetate 0.5 mg) reduced dysmenorrhea,
non-menstrual pelvic pain (NMPP) and dyspareunia in premenopausal
women with endometriosis-associated pain (EM). Rel-CT was associated
with minimal BMD loss over 24 weeks (wks). To characterize safety in
patients from different regions, we assessed if there was geographical
variation in skeletal response to Rel-CT.
Methods: Premenopausal women (age 18–50 y) with moderate-to-severe
dysmenorrhea and NMPP were randomized 1:1:1 to receive Rel-CT or
placebo (PBO) for 24 wks, or Delayed Rel-CT (relugolix 40 mg alone then
Rel-CT; both for 12 wks). Lumbar spine (L1–L4) BMD was assessed by
DXA at baseline, Wk 12 and 24. Change in BMD from baseline was
summarized by treatment group. Analyses were stratified by geographical
region (Europe, North America [NA], Rest of World [RoW]).
Results: In the pooled SPIRIT studies (N=1251), mean% change from
baseline at 24 wks in lumbar spine BMD were 0.12% for PBO, –0.72%
with Rel-CT, and –1.94% with Delayed Rel-CT. By region, results with
Rel-CT were similar at 12 and 24 wks in Europe, NA and RoW (Table).
Similar results were seen at the proximal femur.
Table.
N
Least squares mean (SE)% change from
baseline in lumbar spine BMD
Wk 12
Wk 24
Overall
PBO
416
0.09% (0.16)
0.12% (0.18)
Rel-CT
418
–0.49% (0.16)
–0.72% (0.17)
Delayed Rel-CT
417
–1.76% (0.17)
–1.94% (0.18)
Europe
PBO
265
0.39% (0.59)
0.42% (0.60)
Rel-CT
270
–0.33% (0.59)
–0.49% (0.60)
Delayed Rel-CT
265
–1.70% (0.59)
–1.94% (0.60)
NA
PBO
89
0.00% (0.29)
0.12% (0.33)
Rel-CT
90
–0.45% (0.29)
–0.85% (0.32)
Delayed Rel-CT
91
–0.97% (0.29)
–0.94% (0.32)
RoW
PBO
62
–0.29% (0.38)
–0.36% (0.38)
Rel-CT
58
–0.33% (0.39)
–0.69% (0.38)
Delayed Rel-CT
61
–2.20% (0.39)
–2.38% (0.39)
Conclusions: Compared with relugolix alone, Rel-CT minimized BMD
loss over 24 wks. Similar results with Rel-CT were observed among
different geographic regions. Rel-CT is a potential option to provide
therapeutic benefit while preserving BMD for women with EM.
Disclosures: Consulting fees: MM, SF (Myovant Sciences). Employee/
stock: SJI, RBW (Myovant Sciences). This study was funded by
Myovant Sciences.
P677
HORTON'S DISEASE ABOUT A CASE
S. Yanis1, C. Ouardia1, H. Houda1, B. Ryma1, D. Chafia1
1Rheumatology Departement Mohamed Lamine Debaghine Hospital,
Alger, Algeria,
Objective: Horton's disease or giant cell arteritis is the most common
systemic vasculitis of large and medium caliber arteries, most often
affecting people over 50 years old. This vasculitis is associated in 40%
of cases with polymyalgia rheumatica. The definitive diagnosis is based
on biopsy of the temporal artery. We report the case of a patient with giant
cell arteritis.
Case report: Mr KA, 69 years old with no medical history, who consults
for a recent onset of an inflammatory scapulalgia associated with diffuse
headaches predominantly temporal and intermittent jaw claudication, all
evolving in a context of fever, weight loss of 13 kg in 3 months and
profound asthenia. A history of morning stiffness exceeding 1 h was
found. Clinical examination revealed painless limited movements of the
shoulders predominantly on abduction and flexion, an induration of the
temporal arteries with decreased pulsation on the right side, and a recent
reduction in visual acuity on the same side. Investigations: ESR=105
mmh1; CRP=65 mg/l. Ultrasound of the shoulders: tenosynovitis of the
biceps brachii bilaterally. Vascular echo-doppler of the temporal arteries
finds a diminished flow in both temporal arteries especially on the right
side, without a halo sign. Biopsy of the right temporal artery:
granulomatous arteritis made of intimal thickening with histiocytes in
contact with the internal elastic limiter and an inflammatory giant cell
infiltrate. The patient was put on corticosteroids at a dose of 0.7 mg/kg/
d associated with adjuvant measures with a spectacular response after 5 d
marked by a disappearance of clinical signs and a negativation of the
biologic inflammatory features.
Conclusion: Horton's disease remains a rare condition whose functional
prognosis can be threatened especially by the risk of blindness, hence
early diagnosis and adequate management must be initiated.
P678
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN METABOLIC SYNDROME
AND OSTEOARTHRITIS
E. A. Taskina1, N. G. Kashevarova1, E. A. Strebkova1, E. P. Sharapova1,
L. I. Alekseeva1, A. M. Lila1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the relationship between MS and its components
and clinical and radiological manifestations of knee OA.
Methods: The prospective study included 125 women with Kellgren-
Lawrence stage II-III knee OA (ACR). The average age of pts was 54.2
±7.6 y.o., the average disease duration was 8(4-12) y. An individual map
was filled out for each patient, including anthropometric indicators,
anamnesis and clinical, instrumental examination data. MS according to
the IDF.
Results: MS is diagnosed in 60% of pts. The pts were divided into 2
groups, according to the presence or absence of MS (Table). Pts with MS
had a more severe clinical course of knee OA: higher levels of the total
WOMAC, pain and functional failure; synovitis and pronounced cartilage
defects and bone marrow edema (according to WORMS) were more
often detected. The laboratory examination revealed higher
concentrations of COMP, insulin, cholesterol, and TG in patients with
MS. Spearman correlation analysis showed positive correlations between
MS and knee pain according to VAS (r=0,35, p=0.02), dimensions of
medial osteophytes of the femur (mm) (r=0.41, p=0.01), synovitis
(r=0.23, p=0.05), CRP (r=0.31, p<0.0), COMP (r=0.49, p<0.01) and
leptin (r=0.4, p<0.01).
Table.
Parameter
Pts with MS (n=75) Pts without
MS (n=50)
p
Dimensions of medial
osteophytes of the
femur, mm, Me
4.5 (2.3-5.7)
2.1(1.3-3)
0.01
Knee pain (VAS),mm,
Me
47 (40-60)
40 (33-51)
0.07
Leptin, ng/ml, Me
33.9(25.5-48.2)
24.7(15.1-32.1) 0.008
COMP, ng/ml, Me
30.4(23.5-43.6)
20.3(18.6-30.4) 0.001
S332
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: It has been demonstrated that the metabolic phenotype of
OA has a more severe course. The correlation analysis showed significant
positive associations between MS and knee pain according to VAS, sizes
of osteophytes, synovitis, CRP, leptin, insulin, and COMP. The results
obtained confirm that the therapy of this phenotype should include
therapeutic interventions aimed not only at OA, but also at the
components of MS.
P679
PREDICTION OF SUSTAINED BIOLOGIC AND TARGETED
SYNTHETIC DISEASE MODIFYING ANTIRHEUMATIC
DRUG FREE REMISSION IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
PATIENTS
T. Burkard1, R. D. Williams2, E. Vallejo-Yagüe1, T. Hügle3, A. Finkch4,
D. Kyburz5, A. M. Burden1
1ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Erasmus University Medical Centre,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 4University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,
5University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland
Objective: To develop a prediction model of sustained remission
following biologic or targeted synthetic disease modifying antirheumatic
drug (b/tsDMARD) stop in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Methods: We conducted an explorative cohort study among
b/tsDMARD RA treatment episodes courses stopped due to remission
in the Swiss Clinical Quality Management registry (SCQM) [2008-
2019]. The outcome was sustained b/tsDMARD free remission of
≥12 months. We applied logistic regression model selection algorithms
using stepwise, forward, backward selection, and penalized regression to
identify patient characteristics predictive of sustained b/tsDMARD free
remission. We compared c-statistics corrected for optimism between
models. The three models with highest c-statistics were validated in
new SCQM data until 2020 (validation dataset).
Results: We identified 302 eligible episodes of which 177 episodes
(59%) achieved sustained b/tsDMARD free remission. Two backward
and one forward selection model with 8, 4, and 7 variables, respectively,
obtained highest c‑statistics corrected for optimism of c=0.72, c=0.70,
and c=0.69, respectively. In the validation dataset (47 eligible episodes),
the models performed with c=0.99, c=0.80, and c=0.74, respectively, and
excellent calibration. The best model included the following 8 variables
(measured at b/tsDMARD stop): RA duration, b/tsDMARD duration,
other pain/anti-inflammatory drug use, quality of life (EuroQol),
DAS28-erythrocyte sedimentation rate score, health assessment
questionnaire (HAQ) score, education, and interactions of RA duration
and other pain/anti-inflammatory drug use, and of b/tsDMARD duration
and HAQ score.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that models with up to 8 variables may
predict sustained b/tsDMARD free remission with good efficiency.
External validation is warranted. Our results suggest that a model with
up to 8 variables (identified at b/tsDMARD stop due to remission) may
predict sustained b/tsDMARD free remission with good efficiency.
External validation is warranted.
Acknowledgements: The SCQM is financially supported by
pharmaceutical industries and donors (www.scqm.ch/sponsors). A
variety of rheumatology offices and hospitals contribute to SCQM
(www.scqm.ch/institutions).
P680
OSTEOPOROTIC THORACOLUMBAR FRACTURE'S
MANAGEMENT: A CASE REPORT
A. Aguirre1, P. Sevilla1
1San Pedro Hospital, Logroño, Spain
Objective: As life expectancy increases so does elderly population and
osteoporosis rates. Osteoporosis is defined as a decrease of the BMD
witch clinically states on an increase of the bone fragility and subsequent
fractures. The spine is the most common site for osteoporotic fractures
and these can result in significant morbidity and potential mortality even
though they are likely to heal without complication. Although
conservative is the initial treatment option for most of these osteoporotic
fractures, in some of them operative treatment is indicated as it was on the
case we report. Our objective is to expose a case report of a patient who
needed surgical treatment of an osteoporotic lumbar fracture after failure
of the conservative treatment.
Case report: We present the case of a 77-year-old woman who came to
our hospital with a lumbar back pain after she falling from a chair, she did
not have any neurological focality, and she was immobilized with an
orthosis. An X-ray test was taken (Figure 1) where we could see an
osteoporotic L1 fracture which has lost more than 50% of the height
and with a Farcy angle of 22º. We consider this fracture as unstable and
we decided to do a posterior percutaneous transpedicular fixation
including the superior and the inferior vertebral bodies, D12 -L1 -L2.
(Figure 2) We decided not to do any augmentation technique. After 2
months of follow up, the patient is happy with the result, her back pain
does not restrict her everyday activities and the L1 vertebral body has not
shown any signs of increasing collapse.
Figure 1. Lateral X-Ray of L1 acute fracture
S333
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure 2. Percutaneous posterior instrumentation D12-L2, postoperative
X-Ray
Conclusion: Elderly and female are two of the biggest risk factors for
osteoporosis. It is important to diagnosis this fractures and to treat them,
but above all it is essential to prevent these fractures.
P681
MORTALITY RISK ASSOCIATED WITH OSTEOPOROTIC
FRAGILITY FRACTURE
S. Azevedo1, H. Parente1, C. Soares1, J. Ramos Rodrigues1, F.
Guimarães1, D. Santos-Faria1, D. Peixoto1, J. Tavares-Costa1, C.
Afonso1, F. Teixeira1
1Rheumatology Dept., Unidade Local de Saúde do Alto Minho, Ponte de
Lima, Portugal
Objective: To assess predictive factors of mortality occurring after a FF.
Methods: We performed a retrospective monocentric study that included
patients with a FF observed at the emergency department (ED) in a
tertiary center, between 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2018, with 2-
4 y follow-up after FF (until 31 December 2020). 1673 FF were
identified. After calculating a representative sample (90%CI), 172 hip,
173 wrist and 112 vertebral fractures were included. In multivariate
analysis we included variables with a significant association in univariate
analysis and those with clinical relevance.
Results: There was a total of 457 patients evaluated, out of these 79.9%
(365) were woman with a mean age of 77.6 (SD=10.3) years old at the
time of their FF. 120 patients (26.3%) died during the follow-up period,
35.9% of the men and 23.8% of women inserted in this study. Of these
patients 46.5% had a hip fracture and 20.5% a vertebral fracture. We
found an association between mortality and male gender (p=0.024), age
(older patients had a bigger mortality, p<0.001), hip fracture (p<0.001),
more daily different medications (p<0.001) and comorbidities (p=0.001),
daily oral corticosteroid treatment (p=0.024), normal or low body index
mass (BMI) (p<0.001), previous visits to the ED due to falls (p=0.022),
type 2 diabetes (p=0.022), cardiac disease (p<0.001), neurologic disease
(p<0.001), chronic kidney disease (p<0.001) and no osteoporosis
treatment started after FF (p=0.007). No associations were found between
mortality and previous fractures before the fracture included in this study,
anxiolytic or antiepileptic treatment, arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia
or other comorbidities. After adjustment for gender, daily medication,
comorbidities, anti-osteoporotic treatment, previous visits to the ED due
to falls and type 2 diabetes, the main predictors of mortality were age
(p<0.001), hip fracture (p=0.004), daily corticosteroid treatment
(p=0.009), normal or low BMI (p<0.001) and cardiac (p=0.041),
neurologic (p=0.049) or chronic kidney disease (p<0.001).
Conclusion: Age, hip fracture and certain comorbidities seem to be
associated with higher mortality after a FF. We need to consider these
comorbidities and actively search for osteoporosis in these patients to
prevent FF.
P682
EFFECTIVENESS OF CALCIUM CITRATE IN COMPARISON
WITH CALCIUM CARBONATE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF
CHRONIC HYPOPARATHYROIDISM
A. Palermo1, G. Tabacco1, F. Vescini2, G. Sanson3, G. G. Incognito1, A.
Falchetti4, D. Bosco5, A. Santonati5, P. Pozzilli1, N. Napoli1, S.
Manfrini1, P. Trimboli6, G. Mazziotti7, R. Cesareo8, A. M. Naciu1
1Unit of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Campus Bio-Medico University,
Rome, 2Dept. of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Santa Maria della
Misericordia Hospital, Udine, Italy, 3Clinical Dept. of Medical, Surgical
and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 4Dept. of
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, IRCCS, Istituto Auxologico
Italiano, Milan, Italy, 5Dept. of Endocrinology, San Giovanni
Addolorata Hospital, Rome, Italy, 6Clinic for Endocrinology and
Diabetology, Lugano Regional Hospital, Ente Ospedaliero Cantonale,
Lugano, Switzerland, 7Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas
University, Milan, Italy, 8UOS Malattie Metaboliche, Santa Maria
Goretti Hospital, Latina, Italy
Objective: Hypoparathyroidism(HypoPT) is characterized by a deficient
secretion/action of PTH associated with low calcium level. It was clearly
demonstrated that HypoPT managed with conventional therapy is strictly
associated with increased risk of nephrolithiasis. Citrate salts are widely
used in the treatment of nephrolithiasis, due to their inhibitory effect on
kidney stone formation. Up to now, there are no studies aimed to assess
the efficacy of calcium citrate(Ca Cit) for the management of HypoPT.
This study aimed to assess the impact of Ca Cit vs. calcium carbonate (Ca
Carb) on the nephrolithiasis risk, to investigate its ability to preserver
normal calcium levels and its impact on quality of life (QOL) in HypoPT.
Methods: We designed a randomized, double-blind crossover study and
enrolled subjects with postsurgical chronic HypoPT. From one week
before randomization and during all study period, all patients were
instructed to adhere to a specialized diet at home (low sodium and oxalate
intake). Each subject was randomized to drug A (Ca Cit) or drug B (Ca
Carb) for one month and then crossover to the other supplement for
another month. At each visit, all participants underwent a clinical,
biochemical examination including calcium-phosphorus metabolism
and nephrolithiasis risk evaluation on 24-h urine specimens.
S334
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Results: After consecutive screening, 24 patients with HypoPT (mean
age 54.7±12.5 y, 21 female) have been enrolled. No difference in baseline
anthropometric characteristics and laboratory biomarkers was found
between groups. While the serum calcium levels remain stable in both
groups, a reduction of both urinary oxalate/creatinine ratio (-2.46±11.93
vs. 7.42±17.63, p=0.029) and potassium excretion (-5.66±14.36 vs. 5.00
±14.90, p=0.013) was found in Ca Cit group compared with Ca Carb. At
follow-up, seven patients (30.4%) suffered from constipation after Ca
Carb supplementation compared to one (4.3%) after Ca Cit (p=0.047).
No difference between groups was found for relative changes in SF-36
and fatigue score.
Conclusion: In HypoPT, Ca Cit was able to preserve normal calcium
levels and even though it reduced oxalate/creatinine ratio, it did not
reduce the overall lithogenic risk in comparison to Ca Carb. Ca Cit might
have a positive impact on HypoPT QOL by reducing constipation.
P683
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS PATIENT CLUSTERS WITH
FIRST-TIME BIOLOGIC OR TARGETED SYNTHETIC
DISEASE MODIFYING ANTI-RHEUMATIC DRUGS
IDENTIFIED THROUGH DEEP LEARNING
M. Kalweit1, A. M. Burden2, T. Hügle3, T. Burkard2
1University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland, 3Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland
Objective: To use deep learning to describe patient groups with first-time
biologic or targeted synthetic disease modifying anti-rheumatic drug
(b/tsDMARD) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Methods: We conducted a descriptive study among RA patients with
first-time b/tsDMARD use in the Swiss Clinical Quality Management
registry (SCQM) between 1999-2018. The date of the fist-time
b/tsDMARD use was the cohort entry. Patients with a DAS28-
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) record ≤6 months of first‑time
b/tsDMARD use were eligible. At cohort entry, patients were clustered
using deep embedded clustering via an adaptive deep neural network. We
defined the numbers of clusters in different runs to be 3, 4, and 5. We
further performed the clustering process twice with differing
specifications. Features were measured at cohort entry and included
demographics, RA disease burden/duration, lifestyle factors, and
conventional synthetic (cs) DMARD and prednisone use.
Results: A total of 24 identified clusters comprised 362-1481 patients per
cluster among 3516 unique patients. Each cluster was similar to at least 1
other cluster based on patient characteristics. Thus, we could group all
clusters into 6 distinct groups. First, clusters with highest frequencies of
individual csDMARD and prednisone use and a tendency towards
seropositive and no family history of rheumatic diseases. Second, clusters
of men with highest frequency of smoking and BMI. Third, clusters of
seronegative patients with lowest frequency of prednisone use. Fourth,
clusters of women with high disease burden/duration. Fifth, clusters of
younger patients with low disease burden/duration and a tendency
towards seropositivity. Sixth, clusters of older patients.
Conclusion: This study suggests that deep learning can be used to
identify different RA patient groups with first-time b/tsDMARD use.
Acknowledgements: Pharmaceutical industries and donors support
SCQM financially (www.scqm.ch/sponsors). Rheumatology offices and
hospitals contribute data to SCQM (www.scqm.ch/institutions).
P684
FALLS IN WOMEN WITH RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
A. Y. Feklistov1, O. V. Dobrovolskaya1, O. A. Nikitinskaya1, N. V.
Toroptsova1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: In a retrospective study, to identify the frequency of falls and
the factors that affect them in pts with RA
Methods: 93 women (mean age 61.2±10.7 y) with RA, confirmed in
accordance with the criteria of ACR/EULAR (2010), were enrolled.
The median duration of the disease was 12.4 [4.0;18.0] y. Baseline
assessments included socio-demographic, medical and lifestyle related
risk factors: age, BMI (kg/m2), fall occurrence in the last 12 months;
ESR (mm/h); CRP (mg/l), creatinine (mkmol/l), uric acid (mmol/l), pain
(VAS) ranging from 0-100 mm; disease activity, measured by the Disease
Activity Score 28/ESR (DAS-28/ESR); anti-RA treatment, smoking,
dizziness, visual impairment, physical function, assessed by the HAQ;
risk of falling - the 5-time sit down-to-stand up test, hand grip strength
and the Short Battery of physical performance.
Results: 44 (47.3%) pts with RA had at least one fall, among them 19
(20.4%) experienced multiple (>1) falls during the past year. Persons with
falls were older and had a lower BMI. There was a significant positive
correlation by Spearman between falls and age of RA pts (r=0.28,
p<0.05), DAS 28 (r=0.29, p<0.05), pain on the VAS (r=0.33, p<0.05).
Smoking (r=0.24, p<0.05), dizziness (r=0.22, p<0.05). In univariate
logistic regression analyses age (OR 1.06; 95%CI 1.01-1.10; p=0.041),
smoking (OR 3.6; 95%CI 1.01-13.6; p=0.032) and aseptic femoral head
necrosis (OR 3.40; 95%CI 0.90-12.87; p=0.046) were associated with
falls. Number of medications, duration of rheumatoid arthritis, functional
capacity, and physical tests showed no associations with history of falls in
the past year.
Conclusion: We observed that the frequency of falls is quite common in
RA population. The occurrence of falls in our sample of RA pts bears
relation to age, smoking and presence of aseptic femoral head necrosis.
We found out no relation to disease activity, functional capacity, or
physical performance tests.
P685
LOW TRABECULAR BONE SCORE AND INFLAMMATION IN
CROHN’S DISEASE PATIENTS
I. Soare1, A. Sirbu2, B. Mateescu3, M. Diculescu4, C. Tieranu5, L. Cima2,
S. Martin2, S. Fica2
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila Bucharest,
2Endocrinology Dept. Elias Hospital, University of Medicine &
Pharmacy Carol Davila Bucharest, 3Gatroenterology Dept., Colentina
Hospital, University of Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila Bucharest,
4Gastroenterology Dept. Clinical Institute Fundeni, University of
Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila Bucharest, 5Gastroenterology
Dept. Elias Hospital, University of Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila
Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Bone impairment is a common complication in inflammatory
bowel disease. Trabecular bone score (TBS) is a relatively new parameter
in assessment of bone microarchitecture. The aim of the study was to
provide its utility in patients with Crohn’s disease (CD).
Methods: 48 patients diagnosed with CD were included in this study.
Intestinal (fecal calprotectin) and blood inflammatory profile
[erythrocytes sedimentation rate (ESR), protein C reactive, fibrinogen],
were performed to all of them. BMD lumbar spine and hip were evaluated
with DXA, with TBS calculation. A TBS value <1.35 is considered low
TBS. We divided the patients into two groups in order to analyze the
differences.
Results: The patients included in the study had a median age 44 (23) y,
median BMI 24.4 (7.3) kg/m2 and disease duration 7 (6) y. Mean TBS
was 1.38±0.1 and nearly one-third of them had TBS <1.35 (35.4%).
When compared between the groups, patients with low TBS had higher
calprotectin level and ESR level (120 (284) vs. 30 (148) mcg/g, p=0.03,
respectively 17 (20) vs. 8(11) mm/h, p=0.04). Although higher values in
lower TBS group, protein C reactive and fibrinogen were not significantly
different. Significantly lower BMD values at both lumbar spine and hip
S335
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
sites were found in these patients (0.91±0.19 vs. 1.1±0.13, p<0.001,
respectively 0.76±0.13 vs. 0.93±0.12, p<0.001)
Conclusion: TBS could represent a good tool for assessment of bone
abnormalities in CD in active inflammatory state. Higher calprotectin
and ESR levels are seen in patients with low TBS. Prospective studies
should be conducted in order to see if TBS values improves with decrease
of inflammation.
P686
DYSFUNCTION OF THE RESPIRATORY MUSCLES,
EXERCISE TOLERANCE AND CHARLSON COMORBIDITY
INDEX IN PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE
PULMONARY DISEASE
E. Kochetova1
1Petrozavodsk State University, Petrozavodsk, Russia
Objective: To investigate dysfunction of the respiratory muscles,
exercise tolerance and Charlson comorbidity index in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Methods: 76 patients with COPD were observed (34 patients with COPD
2 Stage, 33 patients with COPD 3 Stage, 9 patients with COPD 4 Stage).
The investigated group was made by the patients having the long
experience of smoking. The average age in this group was 61.01±5.05
y. Research of function of external breath was studied with multimodular
installation “Master-Lab/Jaeger”. Maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP)
and maximal expiratory pressure measurements were performed, using
a body plethysmography machine. The Respiratory muscle strength was
assessed by measuring Pi max and Pe max mouth pressures (kPa,% Pred).
Comorbidity was assessed by the Charlson Comorbidity Index, exercise
tolerance test was evaluated by the 6-min walk (6MWD).
Results: Indicators Pi max of the strength of the respiratory muscles were
in COPD patients with 2 stage 7.83±2.04 kPa (75.27±19.79%), in patients
with COPD 3 Stage 6.85±2.03 kPa (65.86±19.25%), in patients with stage
4 COPD 5.61±1.59 kPa (53.77±15.19%). Indicators Pe max of the
strength of the respiratory muscles were in COPD patients with 2 stage
12.19±5.22 kPa (92.29±27.56%), in COPD patients with 3 Stage 9.94±2.9
kPa, (74.3±21.97%), in COPD patients with 4 stage 9.02±1.99 kPa (67.88
±14.83%). 6MWD in COPD patients with 2 Stage was 378.4±96.5 m, in
patients with 3 stage was 351.4±114.16 m, in patients with 4 Stage was
224.28±123.4 m. Charlson comorbidity index in COPD patients with 2
Stage was 3.74±0.96 points, in COPD patients with 3 Stage was 4.21±0.99
points, in COPD patients with 4 Stage was 4.5±1.07 points.
Conclusion: Dysfunction of respiratory muscles in COPD patients with
stage 4 was maximum, the significant decrease of Pi max, a reduction of
exercise tolerance and the highest rate of comorbidity were detected
compared with the parameters of patients with COPD stages 2 and 3.
P687
TRABECULAR BONE SCORE IN YOUNG CROHN DISEASE
PATIENTS: CASE CONTROL STUDY
I. Soare1, A. Sirbu1, M. Diculescu2, B. Mateescu3, C. Tieranu4, S.
Martin5, M. Ionescu4, S. Fica5
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila Bucharest,
2Gastroenterology Dept. Clinical Institute Fundeni, University of
Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila Bucharest, 3Gatroenterology Dept.,
Colentina Hospital, University of Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila
Bucharest, 4Gastroenterology Dept. Elias Hospital, University of
Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila Bucharest, 5Endocrinology Dept.
Elias Hospital, University of Medicine & Pharmacy Carol Davila
Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Low BMD is a common complication associated with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients. Multiple risk factors are
linked, including chronic inflammation, glucocorticoid treatment,
malabsorption. However, the impact in young adults in still on debate.
Methods: 52 premenopausal women and men <50 y IBD patients and 53
age, sex, BMI matched healthy subjects were included in the study. BMD
(g/cm2) of the lumbar spine and hip was analyzed using DXA and
trabecular bone score (TBS) was calculated by each spine DXA
examination. Low BMD was considered as Z-score<-2SD.
Results: 33 Crohn’s disease (CD) and 19 ulcerative colitis (UC), with
median age 33 (17) y and disease duration 5 (7) y, mean age at diagnosis
26.9±10.3 SD y, median BMI 22.2 (5.4) kg/m2 were enrolled in the study.
53 age, BMI, gender matched healthy subjects comprised the control
group. All DXA parameters were significantly lower in IBD patients than
in controls: LS BMD (1.07±0.17 vs. 1.16±0.16, p=0.005), hip BMD
(0.91±0.13 vs. 0.98±0.13, p=0.01) and TBS (1.40±0.1 vs. 1.45±0.099,
p=0.01). Moreover, low BMD prevalence was higher in IBD patients
when compared to controls. (χ=8.5, p=0.003).
Conclusion: Low BMD represents an important complication that can
occur even in younger adults, and long term follow up should be offered
in order to decrease the risk of fragility fractures.
P688
DXA-BASED BONE STRAIN INDEX IN NORMOCALCEMIC
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
G. Tabacco1, C. Messina2, L. Rinaudo3, S. Falcone4, R. Cesareo5, S.
Manfrini1, N. Napoli1, F. M. Ulivieri6, A. Palermo1, A. Naciu1
1Unit of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Campus Bio-Medico University of
Rome, Rome, 2IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milano,
3TECHNOLOGIC Srl, Torino, 4Unit of Endocrinology & Metabolic
Diseases, CTO A. Alesini Hospital, University Tor Vergata, Rome,
5UOS Malattie Metaboliche, Santa Maria Goretti Hospital, Latina,
6Casa di Cura La Madonnina, Milan, Italy
Objective: Normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism (NHPT) is a condition
characterized by levels of albumin-adjusted total serum calcium and
ionized calcium consistently within normal limits associated with
constantly elevated PTH values after ruling out secondary causes of high
PTH. Although few previous studies reported bone impairment in
patients with NHPT, the largest recent cross-sectional evaluation showed
no significant reduction of BMD and trabecular bone score nor increased
number of fragility vertebral fractures compared to controls. No definitive
data are available on the bone quality assessment in NHPT. Bone strain
index (BSI) is a new tool to estimate bone strength. It applies the finite
element analysis on lumbar spine and femoral neck DXA images. Higher
BSI values indicate lower bone strength. This study aimed to assess the
lumbar spine (LS), femoral neck (FN), and total hip (TH) BSI in NHPT
compared to controls and PHPT
Methods: Design: cross-sectional study. Setting: Outpatient clinic.
Patients: 40 NHPT, 50 PHPT and 100 age- and sex-matched control
subjects. Main outcome measures: LS-BSI, FN-BSI, TH-BSI.
Results: LS-BMD, FN-BMD, TH-BMD was not different between
NHPT and both PHPT and controls. TBS was not different between
NHPT and both PHPT and controls. FN-BSI was lower in NHPT
compared to PHPT (1.36±0.23 vs. 1.51±0.33, p=0.03), while there were
no differences between NHPT and controls. TH-BSI was lower in NHPT
compared to PHPT (1.52±0.3 vs. 1.72±0.41, p=0.028), while there were
no differences between NHPT and controls. LS-BSI was not different
between NHPT and both PHPT and controls.
Conclusion: In NHPT, BSI is not impaired showing a bone quality
phenotype similar to controls.
P689
SEVERE OSTEITIS FIBROSA CYSTICA IN YOUNG PATIENT
WITH PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM AND THE RARE
MUTATION OF MEN1
E. Bibik1, D. Sazonova1, A. Sheikhova1, A. Eremkina1, N. Mokrysheva1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
S336
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is a rare
inheritable syndrome. None of the described MEN1 mutations has been
associated with peculiar symptoms, a genotype-to-phenotype correlation
doesn’t exist. In most cases, primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is the
initial manifestation of MEN1 in the 2 to 4 decade of life, that can be
mostly asymptomatic.
Methods: We presented a clinical case of 23-year-old patient with severe
bone complications of PHPT and MEN1 mutation of uncertain
significance.
Results: At admission his main complaints included severe pains in the
knees limited his mobility, as well as in the left wrist, lumbar spine,
polyuria and intensive headaches. There was no family history of
endocrinopathies. Since adolescence, he underwent multiple low-energy
fractures of the right tibia, left clavicle, humerus and femur. The
histopathological examination assumed “brown tumors”. Lab tests
confirmed PHPT: albumin-adjusted calcium 2.96 mmol/l (2.1-2.55),
PTH 208.8 pg/ml (16-65), osteocalcin 97.53 ng/ml (11-43), β-СTx
1.68 ng/ml (0.01-0.69), 24-h urinary calcium 8.22 mmol (2.5-8), GFR
120 ml/min/1.73 m2. There was a significant reduction in BMD
especially in femur neck to -3.0 SD using Z-score. US, CT scan and
scintigraphy with 99mTc-sestamibi detected a formation (20×14×13
mm) of the left inferior parathyroid gland (PG). Hormonal tests and
MRI excluded other pituitary and pancreatic pathology. A genetic test
was performed. The exon 10 of MEN1 (NM000244.3) had a rare
heterozygous variant c.1609G>T,p.Gly537Cys (rs587780843) with an
uncertain clinical significance. The surgical revision was carried out, left
inferior PG in upper thymus horn was removed and PTH decreased to
1.22 pg/ml. On the sixth day after surgery hypocalcemia developed (total
calcium 2.05 mmol/l) which was managed with oral calcium
supplementation and alfacalcidol. Morphological examination revealed
benign adenoma with atypical localization.
Conclusion: Low-energy fractures due to cystic bone transformations at
young age requires an extensive diagnostics and checking hereditary
forms of PHPT.
P690
ECHINACEA SP. IN THE PREVENTION OF OSTEOPOROSIS
C. Burlou Nagy1, M. Foghis1, T. F. Borze1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
Objective: Numerous scientific studies have shown the effect of
echinalkamide and echinacoside on inhibiting osteoclast dif-
ferentiation and their mechanism as a potential therapeutic agent for
osteoclast-associated diseases. In this regard, natural alternatives are
being explored to prevent bone loss and the risk of fracture induced by
osteoporosis and less desired side effects. Many osteoclast
suppressants are associated with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
properties. Echinacea purpurea has already been studied for its effect
on anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activity and has been found to
be effective in inflammation-related osteoclastogenesis. Future
research will focus on the potential signaling pathway in cocultures
treated with echinacoside and echinalkamide.
Results: Analyzing the studies, echinalkamide has the greatest
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, and echinacoside causes
significant increases in cell proliferation, alkaline phosphatase activity,
collagen secretion, osteocalcin levels and mineralization, which indicates
their inclusion in a potential treatment for osteoporosis, leading to
improved mineral density and bone biomechanical properties. The data
from the studies show that echinacoside promotes bone regeneration by
increasing the ratio of osteoprotegerin and by stimulating signaling
pathways in cells. The results suggest that echinacoside and
echinalkamide stimulate cell proliferation, differentiation and
mineralization by regulating osteoprotegerin and stimulating signaling
pathways.
Conclusion: Therefore, Echinacea purpurea can be considered a
promising medicinal plant product for the prevention and treatment of
osteoporosis. Currently, on the pharmaceutical market there is a
pharmaceutical preparation in the form of capsules, with Echinacea in
combination with Gentiana which can be recommended for the
prevention of osteoporosis.
P691
THE CASE OF IGG4 RETROPERITONEAL FIBROSIS IN A
FEMALE PATIENT
N. Klyaus1, E. Zvereva2, S. Benevolenskaya1, L. Mitrofanova1, O.
Moiseeva1, M. Gordeev1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Almazov National Medical
Research Centre” of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation,
2LLC AVA-PETER, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
Objective: To show the difficulties in diagnosis of such rare clinical
condition as IgG4-related retroperitoneal fibrosis and to illustrate the
importance of the histological examination of small salivary gland.
Methods: Here we describe the case of IgG4 retroperitoneal fibrosis in a
female patient.
Results: A 47-year-old female patient has presented with abdominal and
back pain, oliguria, low-grade fever and weakness. Previously the patient
was treated by urologist, neurologist and gastroenterologist without
significant effect. On the abdominal and pelvic CT scan there were no
pathological changes detected. But using CT angiography (CTA) we
identified luminal narrowing of the abdominal aorta under the renal
arteries by 20 mm till aortic bifurcation, due to the periaortic soft tissue
mass with a thickness maximum - 14 mm. Due to the hypothesis about
the autoimmune nature of the disease this patient was examined by a
rheumatologist. Clinical data of rheumatological pathology were not
identified. The patient underwent nailfold capillaroscopy – normal pattern
was detected. Rheumatoid factor, antibodies to DNA, titers of antinuclear
factor and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were within normal
limits. The laboratory inflammatory activity wasn’t also detected (ESR
9 mm/h, CRP 0,8 mg/l). Further, we investigated the level of the serum
immunoglobulins G4. It was not elevated (0.32 g/l). We decided to
perform the biopsy of small salivary gland. In histological and
immunohistochemical analysis using monoclonal antibodies to human
IgG and monoclonal antibodies to human IgG4 we revealed plasma cells
infiltration with the expression of IgG4. Therefore, we considered
retroperitoneal fibrosis as a IgG4-related disease. The patient resumed
systemic steroid therapy with a positive effect. On the control CTA after
3 months, previously visualized formation of paraortic soft tissues was
not detected.
Conclusion: Our case underlines the importance of histological
examination of small salivary gland in patients with retroperitoneal
fibrosis.
P692
SMOKING AND OSTEOPOROSIS IN THE MAXILLARY AND
MANDIBULAR BONES
M. Pantor1, D. Domocos1, C. Burlou Nagy1, M. Foghis1, T. F. Borze1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
Objective: Osteoporosis is a condition that occurs frequently in the
elderly, mostly women, with a sedentary lifestyle, smokers, patients
who avoid sun exposure, alcohol users or who have certain chronic
conditions (diabetes, malignancies). of the maxillary bones is especially
evident in the case of requesting patients to restore masticatory or
physiognomic function with the help of dental implants or total
prosthesis. was to identify the relationship between smoking patients
and the existence of osteoporosis of the maxillary bones.
S337
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: Between 12.04.2019-25.02.2020 we recorded 100 patients (75
smokers and 25 nonsmokers) aged 30-78 y, 50 women and 50 men. The
diagnosis of osteoporosis in the jaw bones was made with DXA. Patients
were randomized into 4 groups: I-smokers under 10 cigarettes/d, II- 10-20
cigarettes/d, III-over 20 cigarettes/d, IV-nonsmokers.
Results: Out of the 100 patients, 75 showed signs of osteoporosis in
different degrees. Of these, 47 (62,2%) women and 28 (37,8%) men.
The most frequent cases were highlighted in group III - smokers over
20 cigarettes/d - 21 patients (84%), 15 (71.4%) women and 6 (28.6%)
men. The least cases were in the group of nonsmokers 7 - 3 women and 4
men (28%). In terms of age, 5 cases were 30-45 y, the remaining 95 are
45-78 y (68 women, 27 men).
Conclusion: Smoking has a definite effect on osteoporosis. Also the
percentage of women was significantly higher than that of men. Age also
has a significant effect, the presence of osteoporosis was highlighted
almost exclusively.
P693
SPONTANEOUS RUPTURE OF BAKER'S CYST: CASE SERIES
WITH TWO-YEAR FOLLOW-UP
G. Ocampos1, M. Rezende1, G. Camanho1, R. Gobbi1
1Institute of Orthopedics & Traumatology, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculty
of Medicine, University of São Paulo (IOT-HC-FMUSP), São Paulo,
Brazil
Objective: To describe a series of acute spontaneous rupture of Baker's
cysts with 2-y follow-up.
Methods: 16 consecutive patients with symptomatic ruptured popliteal
cyst were treated acutely with anti-inflammatory measures and physical
therapy.
Results: All patients had good resolution with conservative treatment for
an average period of one week, and there was no recurrence of cyst
rupture in any case, in the 2-y follow-up period.
Conclusion: Spontaneous rupture of Baker's cyst in adult patients can be
very symptomatic and disabling, but once diagnosed, it evolves well with
conservative treatment and rarely relapses.
P694
RECURRENT FOCAL EPILEPSY SEIZURES AND BASAL
GANGLIA CALCIFICATION AS THE MANIFESTATION OF
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
O. O. Golounina1, G. E. Runova1, Y. S. Eremina1, D. E. Marmalyuk1, T.
Y. Tselovalnikova1, V. V. Fadeev1
1I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University of the Ministry of
Health of the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russia
Objective: Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a rare heterogeneous
group of disorders characterised by end-organ resistance to the PTH.
We report on a 21-year-old male patient who presented with seizures
and various other neurological manifestations due to sporadic PHP that
was presumably caused by epigenetic changes.
Case report: Patient A. was admitted to our endocrine clinic at the age of
17 with complaints of intermittent cramps in the arms and legs, abdominal
pain, headache, weakness, fatigue. At the age of 12, he developed focal
epileptic seizures followed by confusion for few minutes. He was
diagnosed with epilepsy and anticonvulsant therapy was prescribed,
however his electroencephalography was unremarkable. Clinical
examination revealed short neck, rare teeth, polythelia (four nipples),
however, patient's vital signs and cognitive function were within normal
limits. Trousseau’s and Chvostek symptoms were absent. Height – 167 cm,
weight – 63 kg. He had no family history of any endocrine or neurologic
diseases. Laboratory test results revealed severe hypocalcemia (1.52
mmol/L; 2.08–2.65), elevated serum phosphorus (1.88mmol/L; 0.78–
1.65) and decreased magnesium concentration (0.59 mmol/L; 0.65–1.05),
elevated serum intact PTH level (34.5 pmol/L; 1.3–6.8) and thyroid
stimulating hormone. In addition, hypocalciuria (0.27mmol/24-h; 2.50–
7.50) and hypophosphaturia (10.26 mmol/24-h; 12.9–42.0) were found.
Computed tomography of brain showed bilateral basal ganglia
calcification. Based on the medical history, laboratory tests a diagnosis of
PHP was considered. Neither mutations nor copy number variations were
detected in the GNAS during genetic analysis. Considering the absence of
Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy and mutations in the GNAS gene, our
patient was most likely affected by the PHP type 2 due to epigenetic
changes. The patient was treated with calcium carbonate 2.5 g/d in divided
doses and alfacalcidol 2 μg, normal level of calcium and phosphorus were
achieved in the serum without hypercalciuria, as well as normalization of
PTH level. We also plan to withdraw anticonvulsant therapy.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the clinical, biochemical and genetic
challenges in the diagnosis of the PHP that should be considered in the
diagnostic investigation of patients with hypocalcaemia and seizures.
P695
EFFECT OF ANGIOPOIETIN-LIKE PROTEIN TYPE 4 ON
OSTEOPOROTIC DISORDERS IN RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS PATIENTS WITH METABOLIC SYNDROME
V. A. Aleksandrov1, A. V. Aleksandrov2, L. N. Shilova1, G. Y.
Osmanova2, N. V. Aleksandrova2
1Volgograd State Medical University, Dept. of Hospital Therapy,
2Research Institute of Clinical & Experimental Rheumatology A.B.
Zborovsky, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the potential role of angiopoietin-like protein type
4 (ANGPTL4) on the risk of osteoporotic disorders in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and metabolic syndrome (MS).
Methods: 88 patients with reliable RA were included in the study.
Determination of ANGPTL4 in serum was performed by enzyme
immunoassay using a commercially available RayBio Human
ANGPTL4 ELISA Kit test system (RayBiotech, USA). The presence of
MS in RA patients was established using the criteria of the National
Educational Program on Cholesterol (NCEP/ATPIII 2004) and the
International Diabetes Federation (IDF). All RA patients underwent
osteodensitometry (Lunar DPX, GE, USA) with estimation of bone tissue
condition according to T-criterion.
Results: ANGPTL4 values in RA patients correlated with age of RA onset
(r=-0.658, p<0.001), DAS-28 disease activity (r=0.449, p=0.001), C-
reactive protein level (r=0.488, p=0.003), ESR (r=0.458, p=0, 002), serum
vitamin D (r=-0.417), urinary calcium (r=0.797, p=0.032), triglycerides
(r=0.42, p=0.018), and the presence of insulin resistance (by HOMA-IR
index) (p=0.033) and osteopenia (r=0.439). Significantly high levels of
ANGPTL4 (p=0.027 compared with RA without MS) and low indices
of BMD (p=0.03 compared with RA without MS) were observed in RA
patients with metabolic syndrome (MS) (n=36).
Multivariate analysis of variance revealed a significant increase in
ANGPTL4 in the serum of RA patients with reduced BMD (p=0.007)
and marked metabolic changes (p<0.001). These factors and their
interactions can explain a significant proportion of the variability in
ANGPTL4 (R2=0.32, p<0.05).
Conclusion: Direct involvement of ANGPTL4 in the mechanisms of
osteoporosis development in RA patients is possible, including effects
on osteoclast differentiation and activation processes, which may lead to
decreased periarticular BMD and increased risk of low energy fractures.
P696
CERVICAL SPINE INVOLVEMENT IN RHEUMATOID
ARTHRITIS AND ANTI-CITRULLINATED PROTEIN ANTI
BODIES
N. Bahaz1, F. Mechid1, C. Dahou-Makhloufi1, A. Ladjouze2, S. Lefkir-
Tafiani3, A. Abi Ayad4
S338
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Rheumatology department, Mohamed Lamine Debaghine hospital.
Algiers, Algeria, Algiers, Algeria, 2-Dept. of rheumatology, Ben
Aknoun hospital Algiers, Algeria, Algiers, Algeria, 3Rheumatology
departement, Beni Messous hospital, Algiers, Algeria, 4Rheumatology
departement, Ain Naadja hospital, Algiers, Algeria
Objective: To study a relationship between cervical spine involvement
and anti citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) in rheumatoid arthritis.
Methods: We conducted a multicenter, prospective, descriptive, cross-
sectional study in 300 patients with rheumatoid arthritis between 2013-
2018. We collected demographic, clinical (Body mass index (BMI),
disease duration, DAS28, HAQ), biological (CRP, ESR, the rheumatoid
factor, ACPA) and radiological data. We study the relationship between
cervical spine involvement (CSI) and ACPA
Results: 80, 3% were female), the mean age was 51, 17±12,68 years , the
BMI was 26,11±5,25, 67, 66 % had comorbidities, the most frequent
were osteoporosis (30%), obesity (24%), hypertension (21,7%). RA mean
duration was 13±9 years, mean DAS 28 was 4,68±1,5 mean HAQ was
1,01±0,69, mean CRP was 15,50 ±12 mg/L, mean ESR was 41,89
±26,8mm, rheumatoid factor was positive in 70,6% and ACPA were
positives in 77,3%. The standard x-rays of cervical spine found 53 (17,
66%) patients with CSI The various lesions of the cervical spine were
atlantoaxial subluxations 13% , 3,66% of lateral atloїdo-axoїd
subluxations , vertical subluxations in 0,66%, C1C2 arthropathies in
2,33% spondylolisthesis in 2%, and 0,33% of spondylodiscitis . The
results of the univariate and multivariate analysis did not find a
relationship between CSI and ACPA (p=0, 71).
Conclusion: Cervical spine involvement in rheumatoid arthritis was
common in our study. The anticitrullinated protein antibodies are
associated with higher clinical activity of the disease. They are important
predictors of radiological signs of erosion, which makes us think that we
can find a relationship between ACPA and CSI in rheumatoid arthritis.
No conflicts of interest
References:
[1] M.Blom et al. Long-term follow-up of the cervical spine with
conventional radiographs in patients with rheumatoid arthritis
(RA).Scand J Rheumatol 2013; 42:281-8.
[2] Kuchi Avni and al. Atlanto-axial instability in rheumatoid arthritis
Mac Med Review 2014; 68(2): 76-81 DOI: 10.2478/mmr-2014-0015
P697
BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND PROXIMAL FEMUR 3D-DXA
ANALYSIS IN TYPE I DIABETES: PRELIMINARY STUDY
M. L. Brance1, L. Rista2, V. I. Rojas3, P. Diaz Baclini4, L. R. Brun4
1Reumatología y Enfermedades Óseas, 2Centro de Diabetes y Nutrición,
3Centro de Diabetes y Nutrición, 4Laboratorio de Biología Ósea. Facultad
de Ciencias Médicas. UNR, Rosario, Argentina
Objective: Type 1 DM (T1DM) is associated with low BMD and
increase fracture risk related to poor diabetic control or coexistent diabetic
complications. BMD by DXA may be considered an inadequate predictor
of fracture risk in DM. Using pQCT and HR-pQCT, a detrimental in the
cortical compartment have been demonstrated in T1DM. This study
aimed to evaluate BMD and cortical and trabecular compartment by
proximal femur 3D-DXA analysis in T1DM.
Methods: Adults T1DM men and premenopausal women (n=27) and
healthy subjects (n=27) as control group (CG) matched by age, sex and
BMI. BMD (g/cm2) was measured by DXA (Hologic) on lumbar spine
(LS), right femoral neck (FN) and total hip (TH). The 3D analysis was
performed with 3D-Shaper software (v2.9, Galgo Medical, Spain):
cortical BMD (sDens - mg/cm2) and trabecular volumetric BMD (trab
vBMD - mg/cm3). Data were expressed as mean±SD and p<0.05 was
considered significant.
Results: 55.6% women (n=15) and 44.4% men (n=12) were included.
Mean age: CG 30.2±9.3 y (range: 19-49) and T1DM 29.1±9.6 y (range:
18-49). The T1DM group had 13.8±8.6 y at DM diagnosis and the
following biochemical parameter at the moment of BMD: glucemia
154.2±59.5 mg/dl (CI95 130.1-178.2); HbA1c 8.3±1.4% (CI95 7.6-8.8);
calcemia: 9.3±0.4 mg/dl (CI95 9.0-9.4); 25OHD: 29.9±7.9 ng/dl (CI95
26.3-33.5); PTH: 29.9±7.9 pg/ml (CI95 26.3-33.5). Three T1DM patients
had any coexistent diabetic complications (retinopathy or nephropathy);
59.3% were under multiple doses of insulin and 40.7% using an infusion
pump. LS BMD=CG: 1.042±0.142 vs. T1DM: 0.988±0.131, p=ns; right
FN BMD=CG: 0.873±0.130 vs. T1DM: 0.853±0.174, p=0.645; right TH
BMD=CG: 0.979±0.115 vs. T1DM: 0.959±0.174, p=0.615; cortical BMD
sDens: CG: 166.5±19.9 vs. T1DM: 163.0±26.8, p=0.589; trab vBMD:
CG: 214.3±32.1 vs. T1DM: 214.2±53.7, p=0.991.
Conclusion: No differences between T1DM and CG were observed in
BMD and cortical and trabecular compartment by 3D-DXA probably
associated to good DM control and few previous DM complications.
P698
FORMATION OF THE SKELETAL BONES IN INFANTILE
RATS AFTER 90-DAY EXCESSIVE CAFFEINE INTAKE
A. Movenko1, V. Bogachenko1, N. Kononenko1, V. Nazarenko1
1State Establishment of Lugansk People’s Republic Saint Luka Lugansk
State Medical University, Lugansk, Ukraine
Objective: To investigate growth rate of the femur, the hipbone, and the
first lumbar vertebra in infantile rats after long-term caffeine intake.
Methods: 18 infantile rats were distributed into 3 groups with 6 animals
in each. Animals of the first group (K-90i) were the intact controls; the
second group (C-90i) comprised the animals that received caffeine daily
at 120 mg/kg of body weight by oral gavage. Animals of the third group
(CM-90i) received caffeine in the same way as group 2 did. Also these
rats received treatment with subcutaneous injections of mexidol at 50
mg/kg of body weight daily. In 90 d after administration of both drugs
animals were killed by anesthetized decapitation, The hipbone, the femur,
and the first lumbar vertebra were excused and prepared for gross
measurements. All data were analyzed with the use of standard software.
Results: In animals of the group C-90i by the 90th day length of both
femur and hipbone were lower than those of K-90i by 7.10% and 4.18%
as well as height of body of the L1 vertebra. – by 10.34%. Other gross
sizes also decreased in comparison with the controls width of the hipbone
– by 10.03%, width of the proximal femoral epiphysis – by 7.11%.
Lateral and antero-posterior sizes of the femoral shaft both decreased by
4.72% and 4.92%. In animals of the group CM-90i (in comparison with
C-90i group) length of the hipbone and the femur increased by 3.02% and
6.81% and height of body of the L1 vertebra – by 6.52%. Also width of
the proximal femoral epiphysis and both cross sizes of the femoral shaft
increased by 6.81%. 4.96%, and 4.60% respectively.
Conclusion: Excessive 90-d caffeine intake results in decrease of both
longitudinal and appositional growth rate of the skeletal bones namely the
hipbone, the femur, and the L1 vertebra. Administration of mexidol to
animals taking excessive caffeine results in restoration of growth rate of
the skeletal bones in infantile rats.
P699
ROLE OF ANGIOPOIETIN-LIKE PROTEINS TYPES 3 AND 4
IN PREDICTING AXIAL FRACTURE RISK IN PATIENTS
WITH RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
V. A. Aleksandrov1, A. V. Aleksandrov2, L. N. Shilova1, G. Y.
Osmanova2, N. V. Aleksandrova2, I. A. Zborovskaya2
1Volgograd State Medical University, the Dept. of Hospital Therapy,
2Research Institute of Clinical & Experimental Rheumatology A.B.
Zborovsky, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: Early detection of osteoporosis signs in rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) patients at increased risk of osteoporotic fractures presents an
S339
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
opportunity for timely lifestyle adjustments or prescription of drug
therapy, which positively affects both the cost effectiveness of treatment
and the quality of life of patients. This study aimed to investigate the role
of ANGPTL types 3 and 4 in predicting the risk of fractures on axial
support areas (lumbar vertebrae and femoral neck) in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis.
Methods: 88 patients with reliable RA (mean age, 54.19±11.97 y, and
duration of disease, 11.21±8.65 y) were included in the study. To
determine ANGPTL4 in serum, we used the RayBio Human
ANGPTL4 ELISA Kit test system (RayBiotech, USA), for ANGPTL3
determination - test system Human Angiopoietin-like Protein 3 ELISA
(Bio Vendor, Czech Republic). All RA patients underwent
osteodensitometry (Lunar DPX, GE, USA) with estimation of BMD.
Results: Significant positive correlation was found between the level of
ANGPTL3 and the presence of osteoporosis (r=0.36, р=0.039) and
between ANGPTL4 and the presence of osteopenia (r=0.44, р=0.028).
There was evidence of a close association between ANGPTL3 and
osteoporotic changes in the femoral neck (BMD Total, r=-0.33, p=0.042;
BMD Troch, r=-0.36, p=0.038; BMD Wards, r=-0.44, p=0.009), and
ANGPTL4 and osteoporotic changes in the spine (BMD L1-L4, r=-0.37,
p=0.025). It was found that patients with elevated levels of ANGPTL3
(more than 445 ng/mL) had osteoporotic fractures in the femoral neck in
33.8% of cases, while those with decreased levels (less than 248 ng/mL)
had 5.9% (χ2=5.257, p=0.022). In the group of RA patients with elevated
levels of APPB4 (>3 SD), osteoporotic fractures in the spine were also
observed in a higher percentage of cases (χ2=4.93, p=0.04).
Conclusion: Presumably the determination of angiopoietin-like proteins
types 3 and 4 can be used in isolation to diagnose osteoporosis in RA
patients at an earlier stage, contributing to independent and accurate
prediction of fracture risk by axial support areas.
P700
OSTEOPOROSIS AND CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE RISK
SCORES IN THE ELDERLY POPULATION: RESULTS FROM
BUSHEHR ELDERLY HEALTH (BEH) PROGRAM
N. Fahimfar1, F. Zahedi Tajrishi2, S. Gharibzadeh3, M. Sanjari1, K.
Khalaji1, G. Shafiee4, R. Heshmat4, I. Nabipour5, B. Larijani6, A.
Ostovar1
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran,
2School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Maryland, USA, 3Dept.
of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Research Centre for Emerging &
Reemerging Infectious Diseases, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran,
4Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran, 5The Persian Gulf Marine Biotechnology Research Center,
The Persian Gulf Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Bushehr
University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran, 6Endocrinology &
Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Previous research suggests BMD might be an independent
predictor of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. This study aimed to
investigate the correlation between BMD and well known CVD risk
scores in the elderly population.
Methods: We used the data from the 2nd phase of the BEH program. BMD
was measured using DXA method. The CVD risks were estimated for all
participants using the original coefficients and variables provided by the
ACC/AHA Pooled Cohort Equations CV Risk. Considering the nonnormal
distribution of CVD risks, nonparametric tests were used. Spearman rank
test was applied to assess the correlation between CVD scores and BMD in
different sites including femoral neck, and spine. The estimated risks were
compared in participants with and without osteoporosis.
Results: A total of 2405 participants (1160 men) with a mean age of 69.3
(±6.4) y were included. ACC/AHA risk score showed a significant
negative correlation with the femoral neck t-score in both men
(Spearman's rho: -0.147, p-value: <0.001) and women (Spearman's rho:
-0.269, p-value: <0.001). In women, a significant negative correlation
was detected with the spinal t-score (Spearman's rho: -0.123, p-value:
<0.001). The comparison of CVD risks in the osteoporotic and non-
osteoporotic population are provided in Table. In all, individuals with
both femoral neck and spinal osteoporosis showed a higher CVD risk
than the non-osteoporotic population.
Conclusion: The results showed a significant correlation between the
femoral neck and spinal t-scores with the ACC/AHA CVD risk score.
The median risk scores of CVD were significantly higher in individuals
with osteoporosis in different sites in both men and women.
Table. The median CVD risk scores in the osteoporotic and
nonosteoporotic elderly population.
Osteoporosis
+
Osteoporosis
-
P-value
Women
Femoral neck
0.197
0.131
<0.001
Spinal
0.172
0.143
0.0001
Men
Femoral neck
0.289
0.240
0.003
Spinal
0.221
0.252
0.005
P701
STRENGTH OF THE HUMERUS IN RATS AFTER
IMPLANTATION OF OK-015 INTO THE TIBIA AND IV
ADMINISTRATION OF MESENCHYMAL STEN CELLS ON
THE 24TH DAY AFTER INTERVENTION
N. Pashchenko1, V. Luzin1, I. Frolov1, Y. U. Venidiktova1
1State Establishment of Lugansk People’s Republic Saint Luka Lugansk
State Medical University, Lugansk, Ukraine
Objective: To test strength features of the humerus in rats after
implantation hydroxyapatite material OK-015 into the tibia and
intravenous injections of allogenic mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) 24 d
after intervention.
Methods: In the study 72 male rats were distributed into several groups.
Group K consisted of intact animals. Group D comprised animals with
fracture of the tibia modeled as a 2 mm round opening in the proximal
part of the tibia. In animals of group OK the openings in the tibiae were
filled with hydroxyapatite material OK-015. Animals of MSC24 group
received IV injections of MSC (5E6 per injection) in 24 d after
implantation of OK-015. Observation terms were 30, 60, and 90 d after
implantation. MSC were obtained from the red bone marrow of donor
animals. Phenotyping was performed with the use of indirect fluorescent
immunoassay with the help of the markers to MSC of the cell culture.
Strength features were tested with the help of three-point bending
technique at loading speed of 0.25 mm/min up to destruction. Distance
between support points of the loading device was 10 mm. Statistical
analysis of the data obtained was performed y means of standard
software.
Results: Fracture of the tibia resulted in decrease of strength of the
humerus with manifestations peak registered by the 30th and the 60th days
after intervention. In the OK group strength exhibited decrease in early
terms of observation with faster restoration in later terms. In MSC24
group no significant changes as compared with the controls were found.
Comparing data from MSC24 group with OK group we found out that
specific sag values increased on the 30th and the 90th days by 6.30% and
5.16%.
Conclusion: Administration of MSC on the 24th day after implantation of
OK-015 into the tibia slightly optimizes elasticity of the humerus on the
30th and the 90th day of the experiment. Hence administration of the stem
S340
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
cell in order to reduce systemic effects of fractures and surgery on the
skeleton must be started shortly after onset of adverse event.
P702
EFFECTS OF QUERCETIM AND THIOTRIAZOLIN ON BONE
FORMATION IN PRESENILE DIABETIC RATS WITH TIBIA
FRACTURE
A. Torba1, V. Luzin1, D. Lugovskov1, N. Botnar'1
1State Establishment of Lugansk People’s Republic Saint Luka Lugansk
State Medical University, Lugansk, Ukraine
Objective: Improvement of bone formation in presenile diabetic rats with
tibia fracture using thiotriazolin (TTZ) and quercetin (QU).
Methods: In the experiment we used 210 rats with body weight of 290-
300 g aged 17-18 months. 1st group consisted of intact rats, 2nd group
consisted of rats with tibia fracture made in the proximal part of the tibia.
Diabetes mellitus (3rd group) was caused by a single intraperitoneal
injection of streptozotocin (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at 55 mg/kg. In 72 h we
performed bloodsugar test in these animalsand pickedthose inwhichblood
sugar level was 12 mmol/l or above. In animals of 4th group fracture of the
tibia was modeled after diabetes development. Last two groups of diabetic
rats with the tibia fracture received intraperitoneal TTZ (117.4 mg/kg daily)
and intragastric QU (0.32 g/kg daily). The humeri (H), the hipbones (HB),
and L3 vertebra (LV) were excised and prepared for gross measurements.
Results: In 3rd group growth also slowed in the same period yet
restoration of growth rate was not observed, by the 90th days sizes of
the H, HB and LV decreased in comparison with the controls by 4.67-
7.74%. In 4th group in comparison with 2nd group growth deceleration
even progressed by the 60th and the 90th days. In animals that received
QU sizes of the bones grew in comparison with those of 4th group
beginning from the 60th day yet stayed outside confidence interval. In
animals that received TTZ width of the H shaft by the 60th and the 90th
days increased in comparison with that of 4th group by 5.88% and 4.84%.
Width of HB, width of LV body and antero-posterior size of the H shaft
increased by 5.27%, 4.12%, and 4.76% by the 90th day.
Conclusion: Diabetes and fracture in rats result in inhibition of growth
rate by the 60th and the 90th days. Fracture in diabetes has more adverse
effects on bone growth in the same period. Administration of QU and
TTZ to diabetic animals with fracture results in restoration of growth rate.
TTZ is more effective than QU.
P703
PREDICTIVE VALUE OF TIP APEX DISTANCE IN
INTERTROCHANTERIC FRACTURE MANAGED BY
PROXIMAL FEMORAL NAILING
V. Khanna1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics, Kailash Hospital, Khurja, India
Objective: Tip apex distance (TAD) is a well established method of
prediction of outcome in intertrochanteric fractures managed by dynamic
hip screw. This retrospective study was done to assess the significance of
TAD in the management of intertrochanteric fractures by proximal
femoral nail.
Methods: The study was done in a tertiary care center where 174 follow-up
patients operated for intertrochanteric fractures with proximal femoral nail
were included in the study. The radiological outcome of patients was
assessed using the neck-shaft angle, neck length, and offset whereas the
functional status was assessed using the Harris hip score and the Lower
extremity functional scoring system. These functional and radiological
outcomes were compared with the TAD for any significant findings.
Results: The tip apex distance on the postoperative X-ray was found to be
22.93 +3.88 mm. The Lower Extremity Functional Score was found to be
70.71+8.153. The Harris Hip Score was found to be 85.408+9.586.
Change in the neck length as compared to the uninjured hip was found
to be 1.46+1.705. Change in the offset and neck-shaft angle was 1.38+
1.567 and -2.61+1.27 respectively. There were 8 cases of screw cut out
and 8 cases of superficial infection.
Conclusion: The Harris hip score and the LEFS increased with decreasing
values of the TAD. The neck shaft angle, neck length, and offset all
decreased with the increase in the TAD. The Harris hip score and the
LEFS decreased with the decrease in the neck shaft angle, Neck length,
and offset. On examining the 2 groups one with TAD <25 mm and the
other with TAD >25mm it was seen that both functionally and
radiologically, the outcome was better in the group having TAD <25
mm. This study indicates that the Tip Apex Distance can be used as a
useful predictor of the outcome of the proximal femoral nail in
intertrochanteric fractures.
P704
THE EFFECTS OF THIAZIDE USE ON BONE MINERAL
DENSITY
A. McDonough1, E. Laird2, L. Hoey3, C. F. Hughes3, H. McNulty3, M.
Ward3, J. J. Strain3, A. Molloy2, C. Cunningham4, K. McCarroll1
1Bone Health and Osteoporosis Unit, Mercer's Institute for Successful
Ageing, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 2Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland, 3Ulster University, Coleraine, UK, 4Mercer's Institute for
Successful Ageing, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Objective: Thiazide diuretics are widely used drugs in the treatment of
hypertension. Previous studies have described a positive influence on
BMD and fracture risk. We aim to explore the effect of thiazide use on
BMD in an older, Irish Population.
Methods: Study participants were derived from the Trinity Ulster Dept.
of Agriculture (TUDA) patient cohort of over 5,000 community-
dwelling, Irish adults aged >60 y. Participants who were treatment
naïve to osteoporosis medications and had BMD measurements of the
spine and hip using DXA were included. The relationship between
thiazide use and BMD was explored in multinomial regression models.
Results: We identified 3663 patients, mean age 73.4 y (range 60-98.8),
58.5% female and 20.4% (n=747) were taking thiazides. Thiazide use
was positively associated with BMD at the femoral neck (P=0.04), total
hip (P=0.003) and spine (P=0.0001), before and after adjustment for age,
gender, BMI, smoking and alcohol use, steroid use, physical frailty
(Timed Up and Go) and dietary calcium intake. Thiazides were also
associated with significantly lower bone turnover markers (P<0.0001)
and a higher serum calcium level, independent of PTH (P<0.0001). The
association with hip fracture was not significant (P=0.06).
Conclusion: We identified that thiazide use was independently
associated with greater BMD at the femoral neck, total hip and spine.
Thiazides reduce urinary excretion of calcium, and may also increase
intestinal and skeletal calcium absorption, potentially explaining their
impact on BMD. Thiazides can be considered for treatment of
hypertension in older people who are at risk of osteoporosis or fracture.
However, this needs to be balanced with the risk of orthostatic
hypotension and falls, particularly in those with frailty.
P705
CHANGE IN KYPHOSIS DOES NOT AFFECT THE RISK OF
FALLING IN POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPENIC AND
OSTEOPOROTIC WOMEN
D. Nikolaou1, S. Rizou1, G. Lyritis1, V. Nikolaou2, G. Babis2, E.
Chronopoulos2
1Hellenic Osteoporosis Foundation, Athens, Greece, 22nd Orthopedic
Dept., Konstantopoulion Hospital, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
Objective: To examine the annual change in kyphosis and its influence on
the risk of falling in postmenopausal osteopenic and osteoporotic women.
S341
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: This prospective observational study included 498
postmenopausal Greek women exceeding the 50th year of age, suffering
from either osteoporosis or osteopenia. Data on age, height, weight, and
self-reported falls were collected. Additionally, we evaluated the degree
of the kyphosis angle, the balance, the mobility, the functionality and the
hand grip strength on both hands of each participant via the use of the
Debrunner kyphometer, the Berg Balance Scale, the Timed-Up-and-Go
test, the 30 Seconds Sit-to-Stand test and the Jamar Hydraulic Hand
Dynamometer, respectively. All of the above mentioned data were
recorded at the baseline visit and the 1year follow-up visit for each
participant.
Results: All examined variables presented a statistically significant
change at the 1 year follow-up visit. Nevertheless, the annual change in
kyphosis did not show any association with the risk of falling in
postmenopausal osteopenic and osteoporotic women.
Conclusion: No association was shown between the annual change in
kyphosis and the risk of falling in postmenopausal osteopenic and
osteoporotic women, nor bears any substantial prognostic value for future
falls.
P706
INFECTIONS IN THE STRUCTURE OF COMORBID
PATHOLOGY IN PATIENTS WITH INFLAMMATORY
DISEASES OF THE JOINTS
N. V. Muravyeva1, B. S. Belov1, M. M. Baranova1, M. A. Litvinova1, T.
V. Korotaeva1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the significance of infections in the structure of
comorbid pathology in patients with inflammatory diseases of the joint
(IDJ) during a single-stage retrospective study.
Methods: The study included 437 patients with IDJ (259 women, 178
men, mean age 45 y): 172 - rheumatoid arthritis, 169 - ankylosing
spondylitis, 74 - psoriatic arthritis, 22 - undifferentiated spondylarthritis.
The majority of patients (n=343) received immunosuppressive therapy
(glucocorticoids, methotrexate, leflunomide, biological drugs). The
patients were interviewed by a research doctor with the completion of a
unified questionnaire. Additional information was obtained from medical
records.
Results: The following comorbid pathology was documented in patients
with IDJ: cardiovascular diseases - 30.1%, gastrointestinal diseases -
27.2%, respiratory diseases - 12.5%, endocrine system diseases -
10.9%, urogenital diseases - 9.1%, skin diseases, except for psoriasis -
4.2%. 653 cases of respiratory tract infections (RTI) and ENT organs and
537 cases of infections of other localization were diagnosed. RTI and
ENT organs included acute nasopharyngitis (n=273), tonsillitis (n=110),
pneumonia (n=69, including 29 caused by the SARS-CoV2 virus), acute
bronchitis (n=54), sinusitis (n=52), influenza (n=47), otitis (n=41),
tuberculosis (n=7). Infections of other localizations were represented by
herpes-viral infections (n=184), mycoses (n=121), urinary tract infections
(n=84), conjunctivitis and blepharitis (n=63), skin infections (n=26),
intestinal infections (n=25), genital infections (n=22), osteomyelitis,
purulent arthritis, nervous system infections (2 cases each), chronic
hepatitis A, B and C, rubella, measles, HIV infection (1 case each).
After the debut of IDJ, an increase in the frequency of acute
nasopharyngitis, acute bronchitis, sinusitis, herpes-viral infections, and
mycoses was noted. Serious infections requiring hospitalization and/or
intravenous administration of antibiotics were diagnosed in 78 patients.
Of these, 64% of cases were caused by RTJ and ENT organs (pneumonia,
including those caused by the SARS-CoV2 virus, acute bronchitis,
sinusitis, purulent otitis), 36% - by other infections (intestinal infections,
purulent paraproctitis, acute salpingitis, purulent endometritis).
Conclusion: The problem of infections in patients with IDJ still remains
relevant. Further studies are needed on large samples of patients with the
aim of studying the prevalence of infections depending on the therapy
(primarily, biological drugs), as well as the search for significant risk
factors.
P707
COMPARISON OF MEAN A BLOOD PRESSURE AND HEART
RATE AFTER A SUSTAINED ISOMETRIC CONTRACTION
TEST FOR 3 MINUTES AT 30% OF MAXIMUM STRENGTH
BETWEEN SUBACUTE POST-COVID-19 PATIENTS AND
HEALTHY CONTROLS
A. Olascoaga-Gómez de León1, X. López-Megchun1, N. C. Centeno-
Morales1, L. E. Quintanar-Trejo1, K. Zarco-Ordoñez1, A. Y. A.
Aragón-Hernandez1, J. Quinzaños-Fresnedo1, R. Coronado-Zarco1
1Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: To compare autonomic blood pressure and heart rate response
to isometric sustained contraction in patients in subacute SARS-CoV-2
infection.
Methods: Subjects in subacute SARS-CoV-2 infection (3 weeks after
diagnosis confirmation), and healthy volunteers were invited.
Autonomic function test was performed using grip dynamometry
described by Ewing, 1973. Measure of grip force was performed using
Jamar type hydraulic dynamometer (kg), maximum strength was
obtained by mean of 3 repetitions of dominant arm, with 1-min interval
between each one. Test consisted of performing voluntary isometric
contraction of 30% of maximum strength for 3 min. A 2-min recovery
period was granted. Blood pressure and heart rate was monitored with a
digital baumanometer (Omron HEM-7322T), of the nondominant arm.
Registration was done 3 times, at the beginning of the test, at the end of
the test and after recovery. Registration of the research and ethics
committee were obtained. Statistical analysis: For qualitative variables,
frequencies and percentages were calculated. Quantitative variables were
compared with central tendency and dispersion measures. Inferential
analysis depending on parametric or non-parametric behavior (Shapiro
Wilk) were calculated by means or medians differences. Repeated
measures factorial analysis was adjusted for age and baseline mean blood
pressure and heart rate as covariates.
Results: We analyzed 50 subjects, 25 in each group. Statistical significant
differences between group ages (cases X=46.3, DS14.7; control X=36.8,
DS 10; p=0.02), mean strength (cases X=29.1, DS 9.4; Control 33.1, DS
8.6; p=0.02), for mean arterial pressure in recovery (case 95.5, SD 10;
control 88.1, SD 10; p=0.01) and heart rate in recovery (case X=78.6, SD
12.9; 71.6. 1, SD 11.8; p=0.05). Results of repeated measures factorial
analysis adjusted for age a had significant statistical difference between
the comparison of both groups in the three measurements (p=0.001; global
significance p=0.07 with statistical power of 66% for mean arterial pressure
and global significance p=0.089 with 65% statistical power for heart rate).
Conclusion: We found differences in blood pressure and heart rate in
patients in subacute COVID-19. Autonomic cardiovascular response to
sustained isometric contraction and recovery are affected. Muscle
strength of post-COVID-19 patients is decreased compared to controls.
Limitations of our study are sample size (statistical power of 65% and
66%) and age differences between groups.
P708
MEDITERRANEAN DIET ADHERENCE AND ITS
ASSOCIATIONS WITH BONE QUALITY, CHRONIC
INFLAMMATION, AND PHYSICAL FUNCTION IN
SARCOPENIC OBESE OLDER ADULTS
M. M. Cervo1, T. McCaffrey2, B. De Courten1, C.-A. Ng1, A. Gandham1,
P. Ebeling1, D. Scott1
1Dept. of Medicine, School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health,
Monash University, 2Dept. of Nutrition and Dietetics, School of
Clinical Sciences at Monash Health, Monash University, Clayton,
Australia
S342
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Sarcopenic obesity adversely impacts bone health of older
adults. However, it is still unclear how diet, particularly Mediterranean
dietary patterns, may exert favourable effects on bone quality and
inflammation in sarcopenic obese older adults. This study aimed to
determine associations between adherence to Mediterranean diet and high
sensitivity C-reactive protein, physical function, bone turnover markers
and bone quality in sarcopenic obese older adults.
Methods: 50 sarcopenic obese older adults with mean age 70.8±6.7 y
were included in this cross-sectional study. Adherence to Mediterranean
diet was assessed using MEDI-LITE (literature-derived Mediterranean
diet) score which was obtained using a validated 3-d food record. Bone
quality was determined using bone turnover markers as well as distal
tibial volumetric BMD and microarchitecture which were assessed using
HR-pQCT. Physical function such as gait speed, and hand grip strength
were assessed by walking a 2.44-m course and using a dynamometer
respectively. Serum samples were analysed for hs-CRP, C-terminal
telopeptide of type 1 collagen (CTX), procollagen type 1 N-terminal
propeptide (PINP), and 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD).
Results: A higher MEDI-LITE score, indicating greater adherence to
Mediterranean diet, was associated with lower cortical porosity (β: -
0.010; 95%CI: -0.018, -0.001) in the fully adjusted model; and higher
cortical cross-sectional area (β: 3.845 mm; 95%CI: 0.591, 7.100) in the
unadjusted model. Sarcopenic obese older adults who had higher
adherence to Mediterranean diet had higher cortical cross-sectional area
(β: 14.282 mm; 0.691, 27.874); cortical volumetric BMD (β: 65.128 mg
HA/cm3; 95%CI: 15.438, 114.818); and cortical thickness (β: 0.168 mm;
95%CI: 0.002, 0.315); as well as lower cortical porosity (β: -0.010;
95%CI: -0.018, -0.001) compared with those who less adhere to
Mediterranean diet. Those who greatly adhere to Mediterranean diet
had lower hs-CRP (β: -1.182 mg/L (95%CI: -2.152, -0.212) in the sex-
adjusted model. MEDI-LITE scores were not associated with physical
function and bone turnover markers.
Conclusion: Greater adherence to Mediterranean diet is associated with
better cortical bone quality, which may be an important target for fracture
and falls risk prevention especially in sarcopenic obese older adults.
P709
MANAGEMENT APPROACHES OF MALE OSTEOPOROSIS
M. R. Păcurar1, D. Păcurar1, M. I. Popescu1, K. Babes1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
Objective: With the aging of our society, the prophylaxis and
management of osteoporosis has become a public health challenge.
Methods: A 80-year-old male patient presents to our department for:
chronic pain in his right knee associated with limping gait. His past
medical history is significant only for moderate renal failure. He takes
no medication, other than OTC analgesics. He is a nonsmoker and denies
alcohol consumption.
Results: Physical examination revealed: BP=110/80 mmHg, HR=70
BPM, SO2 on room air=98%, respiration rate=18 breaths/min,
temperature=36.4°C. He is awake and alert. Locomotor system
examination: bilateral paravertebral muscular contracture in the inferior
dorsal and lumbar region, painful lumbar flexion, bilateral crepitus
present during knee movement, increased sensitivity at right pes
anserinus, severely limited right hip in all axis of movement, (+) Patrick
on the right side, limping gait. ECG: normal sinus rhythm, without
pathological findings. Lab work: altered kidney function, mild
hypercholesterolemia, hypocalcemia, and decreased vitamin D levels.
Multi-level X-ray results: lumbar L4/L5 and L5/S1 discopathy, lumbar
spondylarthrosis, multiple spinal compressions, bilateral gonarthrosis,
right hip pseudoarthrosis. DXA results indicate low bone density (T-score
lumbar spine -3.5, T-score lef femoral neck=-2.8, the right one was
excluded because of severe pathology). Abdominal US: right kidney
atrophy. We initiated antiosteoporotic treatment, vitamin D and
Calcium supplements, antalgic electrotherapy, thermotherapy, therapeutic
massage and physical therapy exercises, adapted to the current conditions.
The patient was referred to an orthopedic specialist for hip replacement.
Conclusion: While evidence regarding the prophylaxis, diagnosis and
treatment of osteoporosis has continuously expanded over the last few
years, gaps in the literature still exist with the management of some
particular cases, like the one we presented.
P710
IMPACT OF HOME CONFINEMENT DURING THE COVID-19
PANDEMIC ON WOMEN WITH OSTEOPOROSIS: RESULTS
OF THE ECTO SURVEY
E. Casado1, S. González2, I. Aristegui3
1Rheumatology Dept.. University Hospital Parc Taulí, Sabadell,
2Obstetrics & Gynecology Dept., HM Gabinete Médico Velázquez,
Madrid, 3Theramex Healthcare, Madrid, Spain
Objective: The home confinement of the Spanish population for 2 months
due to the COVID-19 pandemic could have a negative effect on women
with osteoporosis and worsen their risk of fracture. This study aimed to
analyze the impact of confinement due to the COVID-19 pandemic on the
health and lifestyle of women with osteoporosis in Spain, as well as on
adherence to treatment for fracture prevention.
Methods: Between April 14 and June 19, 2020, Spanish women
diagnosed with osteoporosis and undergoing active treatment were
invited to anonymously answer an online questionnaire of 19 questions
using the Survey Monkey tool (https://www. surveymonkey.com/r/
survey). The study obtained the approval of the CEIm and had the
scientific endorsement of the SEIOMM (Spanish Society for Bone and
Mineral Research) and the AEEM (Spanish Association for the Study of
Menopause), and with the collaboration of AECOSAR (Spanish
Association with Osteoporosis and Osteoarthritis).Results: 543 women
(age 63±9.4 y) from 15 autonomous communities (52% from Madrid or
Catalonia) answered the survey. 65% had been diagnosed with
osteoporosis in the last 5 y and 31% had had a previous fragility fracture.
62% of the patients were receiving oral bisphosphonates, 27%
denosumab, 4% selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERM), 4%
teriparatide, 2% zoledronic acid, and 1% menopausal hormone therapy
(MHT). 75% of the women decreased their physical activity during
confinement, and only 7% increased it. 11% of women reported fewer
falls, compared to 5% who reported having fallen more than before. 7%
and 11% of the women increased their consumption of alcohol and
tobacco respectively. Although 64% of the women did not perceive
changes in their general health, 32% reported having worse health than
before. 51% of the women felt sadder and up to 57% perceived that they
had greater anxiety than before confinement. During confinement, a loss
of adherence to the main treatment for osteoporosis was observed in 14%
of the women (7% abandoned it and 7% confessed that they forgot more
than usual), and this loss was significantly greater in women younger than
59 y (22% vs. 13% of those older than 59 y; p <0.05). Loss of adherence
according to treatment was: MHT/SERM 46%, teriparatide 20%,
zoledronic acid 14%, denosumab 6% and oral bisphosphonates 6%.
Although 9% and 6% of women were non-adherent to calcium and
vitamin D supplements respectively, it's remarkable that 20% of women
increased their dairy products intake. A significant association was
observed between the health perception and treatment adherence
(p<0.05), being the women with worse health perception less adherent
to osteoporosis treatment. No association was found between adherence
and emotional state (anxiety or depression).
Conclusion: Home confinement during the COVID-19 pandemic had a
negative impact on both some lifestyle habits and the health perception
among women with osteoporosis, experiencing most of them a worsening
of their emotional state. Although overall treatment adherence was good,
younger women and/or those who received daily treatments had a higher
proportion of treatment discontinuation.
S343
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P711
NEW PERSPECTIVES OF CHONDROITIN SULFATE:
C O M B I N A T I O N
O F
I N T R A A R T I C U L A R
A N D
INTRAMUSCULAR ROUTE OF RECEIVING IN KNEE OA
E. Sharapova1, N. Kashevarova1, D. Kusevich1, E. Taskina1, L.
Alekseeva1, A. Lila1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Assessment of effectiveness and safety of chondroitin sulfate
intraarticular and intramuscular scheme of receiving in patients with knee
OA in compare with intramuscular course
Methods: in study were enrolled 150 patients with knee OA (2-3 stages
by Kellgren-Lawrence classification). After randomization patients were
divided into two groups 1:1. 1st group got 5 intraarticular injection in
target knee with 200 mg dose once every 3 d, next treatment was 16
intramuscular injection with 200 mg dose every other day. 2nd group
got 25 intramuscular injection with escalation of dose: first 3 injection
in dose 100 mg, from 4th injection dose was stable – 200 mg, every other
day. All patients received NSAIDS (meloxicam 15 mg/d). Measurement
of effectiveness was by WOMAC index, pain by visual analog scale
(VAS), McGiIl Pain Questionnaire (MPQ).
Results: After compare of two scheme of Chondroitin Sulfate treatment at
1st group was lower intensity of pain by VAS that at 2nd group (16,81
±13,49 vs. 21,88±13,24; р<0,0001, respectively). WOMAC index, pain,
stiffness, and functional limitations and pain by MPQ questionnaire were
similar. There was no significant difference between 1st and 2nd groups.
No serious adverse events was identify. Adverse events in follow-up period
were detected in 3.3% (5/150), all AEs were stopped by the end of study.
Conclusion: Chondroitin sulfate have significant analgesic effect in
combination scheme of treatment, and it was anti-inflammatory action
lead to docked of synovitis. Both schemes decreased pain, stiffness,
improved function. This data opens new possibilities of chondroitin
sulfate usage in knee OA with synovitis. Good safety profile of
chondroitin sulfate might be special considerations for patients with
comorbidities.
P712
SOFT BONE IS WEAK: PROSPECTIVE, BLINDED
INTRAOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT OF BONE CORRELATES
WITH T-SCORE
B. Nickel1, D. Krueger1, G. Borchardt1, L. Andersen1, R. Illgen1, D.
Hennessy1, N. Binkley1, P. Anerson1
1University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA
Objective: Intuitively, intraoperative physician assessment (IPA) of bone
would be an excellent measure of quality as surgeons gain insight into
bone strength through haptic feedback while bone preparation is
performed. However, no studies evaluate a surgeon’s ability to do so.
Our purpose was to investigate IPA of bone quality in patients
undergoing total knee arthroplasty (TKA) with a) lowest T-score BMD
b) custom regions of interest (ROI) in distal femur BMD.
Methods: Prospectively, 70 patients identified as primary TKA
candidates by 3 surgeons received pre-operative DXA (spine, hip, wrist,
VFA and TBS). Intraoperatively, the surgeon assessed bone quality on a 5
point scale based on tactile feedback to resistance with preparation:
1=excellent, 2=above average, 3=normal, 4=below average and 5=poor.
This IPA was recorded in the operative note. Demographic data, DXA
results and IPA scale between surgeons was compared by factorial
ANOVA. Lowest T-score (L-spine, femoral neck/total hip and 3 radius)
and custom regions were correlated to IPA using Spearman’s correlation.
Results: Mean IPA was 2.74±1.2 with no statistical difference (p=0.284)
between surgeons. Demographic data, BMD, and lowest T-score of
patients (38 surgeon A, 25 surgeon B and 7 surgeon C) not differ between
surgeons. Mean age was 65.8±7.6 y and BMI 31.4±5.1 kg/m2. IPA
directly correlated with lowest T-score (R=0.482) and ROI (R=0.587-
0.645). Based on lowest T-score, no patients with osteoporosis were
classified as above average bone quality and none with normal BMD
were classified as having poor bone
Conclusion: Novel IPA provides valuable information that can identify
patients with below average/poor bone quality and expedite treatment
ideally decreasing periprosthetic fracture risk. Reproducibility between
three surgeons highlights potential for universal implementation and
future studies may validate IPA in hip replacement aiding implant
fixation selection.
P713
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND BONE MASS:
TRADITIONAL RISK PROFILE
M. R. Păcurar1, D. Păcurar1, M. I. Popescu1, K. Babes1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
Objective: Low BMD appear to be independent risk factor for cardio-
vascular morbidity and mortality in both postmenopausal women and men.
Methods: We present the case of a 73 year-old-female patient,
hospitalised in our department for persistent symptoms: progressive
stiffness and moderate pain in her cervico-dorso-lumbar spine, associated
with radicular pain, bilateral hip and knee pain and limping gait. Her past
medical history is significant for left hip replacement, arterial
hypertension (stabilized on antihypertensive medication) and
dyslipidemia (treated with statins). She is a nonsmoker and denies alcohol
consumption.
Results: Physical examination revealed: BMI=29.4 kg/m², BP-135/85
mmHg, HR=74 BPM, respiration rate=16 breaths/min, SO2=99% on
room air, temperature=36.7°C. She is awake and alert. Locomotor system
examination: moderate superior dorsal kyphosis, flattening of sagittal
spinal curvature, painful lumbar flexion/extension, increased sensitivity
at percussion of lumbar spinous apophysis, (+) Patrick on the right side,
bilateral crepitus present during knee movement, limping gait. Lab work:
nonspecific inflammatory response, hypocalcemia and decreased vitamin
D levels. ECG: normal sinus rhythm with moderate ST-T changes and left
ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography confirmed moderate left
ventricular hypertrophy with preserved ejection fraction, without any
cavity dilation or wall motion pathology. Multilevel X-ray results: lumbar
discopathy, lumbar spondylarthrosis, severe L4 spinal compression,
bilateral gonarthrosis, right coxarthrosis, and left hip prosthesis. DXA
results indicate low bone density (T-score lumbar spine -3.5, T-score
femoral neck=-3.5). Abdominal US: nephrolithiasis. After we completed
the diagnostic workup, we established the following treatment: initiation
of antiosteoporotic drugs, vitamin D and calcium supplements (close
monitoring of calcium and vitamin D levels), antialgic drugs and
rehabilitation program (consisting of–antalgic electrotherapy,
thermotherapy, therapeutic massage and physical therapy exercises),
adapted to the current conditions.
Conclusion: This particular case outlines the correlation between
osteoporosis, cardiovascular diseases and lipid metabolism. Oxidized
lipids have been suggested as a potential mechanism for low BMD and
vascular calcification. Evidence based medicine suggests that abnormal
lipid metabolism has detrimental effects on bone formation, especially in
postmenopausal women. Still, the best way to counteract this complex
processes is the preventive medicine, not well established by the available
research today.
P714
CHALLENGES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF HEART FAILURE
IN OSTEOPOROTIC PATIENTS
M. R. Păcurar1, D. Păcurar1, M. I. Popescu1, K. Babes1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
S344
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: Heart failure and osteoporosis are frequently associated
conditions, particularly in elderly. Management of both conditions in
period of exacerbations can be really challenging.
Methods: We present the case of a 50-year-old female patient. From her
medical history we find out that she suffers from heart failure of an
unknown origin, severe osteoporosis, right thyroid cyst and parathyroid
adenoma that was surgically removed a few years ago. She reports
chronic dyspnea with fluctuations, lightheadedness, reduced exercise
tolerance and chronic generalized pain. She was on chronic medications
for her heart failure and antiosteoporotic drugs. She is a nonsmoker and
has no history of substance use.
Results: At presentation the patient has a normal BMI, BP=115/70
mmHg, HR=118 BPM, respiration rate=18/min, SO2=98% on room
air, T=36.7°C. She is awake and alert, answers questions in full sentences.
Cardiac examination reveals regular mild tachycardia with murmurs and
gallops along with diffuse bilateral crackles. Her lower extremities are not
edematous or tender. An ECG was performed: sinus rhythm, mild
tachycardia, RBBB, a borderline PR interval and premature ventricular
complexes. Bedside echocardiogram reveals a dilated left ventricle with
reduced ejection fraction, severe mitral insufficiency, moderate tricuspid
insufficiency with pulmonary hypertension, interventricular septum
aneurysm and no pericardial effusion or intracardiac masses. Lab work:
dyslipidemia, altered hepatic and renal function, mild hyperglycemia.
After this findings we decided to adjust cardiac medication, to
temporarily stop the antiosteoporotic drug and to refer her to a cardiac
surgeon for severe valve pathology management.
Conclusion: Heart failure and osteoporosis are a public health issue of
growing importance, because their impact on healthcare utilization,
morbidity and mortality. We also know that a close relationship exists
between heart failure and osteoporosis. In this particular case we intended
to outline the challenges in the management of a young patient with two
severe conditions that interfere.
P715
L O W B O N E M I N E R A L D E N S I T Y I M P A C T O N
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES
M. R. Păcurar1, D. Păcurar1, M. I. Popescu1, K. Babes1
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea,
Romania
Objective: Low BMD has been related to increased cardiovascular
pathology and accelerated atherosclerosis.
Methods: A 63-year-old female patient is referred to our cardiology
department with a chronic intermittent atypical chest pain. She also had
vague joint aches and mild fatigue over the past few months. She has had
no recent illnesses and specifically denies having fever, cough, dyspnea
or syncope. Her past medical history reveals osteoporosis (on chronic
treatment), mild dyslipidemia (with normal cholesterol values on statin
medication) moderate arterial hypertension (stable on antihypertensive
drugs) and mild/moderate depression (treated by psychological
counseling only). She is a nonsmoker and has no history of substance use.
Results: At presentation: BMI=32 kg/m2, HR=82 BMP, respiration
rate=16/min, BP=120/80 mmHg. She has an oxygen saturation of 99%
on room air. Her temperature was 36.5°C. She was awake and alert, and
no apparent respiratory distress was present at the time. Cardiac
examination reveals normal sinus rhythm without any murmurs, rubs or
gallops. No wheezing, crackles or edema were found at the time of
examination. Lab work: unremarkable. ECG revealed: mild nonspecific
ST-T changes. Echocardiogram: left ventricular hypertrophy with a
normal ejection fraction (LVEF of 62% estimated by modified Simpson
method), no dilation of ventricle/atrium or wall motion abnormalities
were present at that time. We performed a submaximal exercise stress
test. We consider necessary to stop the test because of significant ST-T
changes on stress ECG. We have to mention that stress test had no impact
on patient chest pain. The vasopressor response at stress was normal with
medication. Coronarography indicated 90% left main vessel stenosis,
with good response after stenting the lesion and pain free. After 3 months
the patient was reassessed for osteoporotic treatment as well.
Conclusion: Evidence based medicine demonstrates that atherosclerotic
calcification and bone mineralization share similar mechanisms and the
two of them are highly organized processes that interfere. It is well
recognized that arterial calcification is not a passive process of calcium/
phosphate deposition, but instead a complex active plaque formation,
similar in structure with inorganic bone matrix. This particular case
outlines the importance of reconsider the management of such case even
if the ischemic pre evaluation test is inconclusive.
P716
CURRENT BUT NOT PAST, BONE-SPECIFIC PHYSICAL
ACTIVITY LEVELS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH BONE
MINERAL DENSITY IN RETIRED RUGBY PLAYERS
I. Entwistle1, P. Francis2, M. Lees3, P. Hume4, K. Hind1
1Durham University, Durham, UK, 2Institute of Technology Carlow,
Carlow, Ireland, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 4Auckland
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
Objective: Regular participation in weight-bearing sports is osteogenic.
However, it is not clear if the benefits are sustained after cessation of sport
or if current exercise levels in later life are more influential. This study
investigated differences in BMD and its association with past and current
levels of physical activity in retired rugby players and retired noncontact
athletes and nonathletes.
Methods: 88 retired male rugby players (46.1±10.5 y; 100±15.1 kg; 1.80
±0.08 m; 42 elite, 46 community level) and 50 retired noncontact athletes
and nonathletes (49.8±14.5 y; 86.5±14.5 kg; 1.77±0.06 m) received a
DXA scan (GE Lunar iDXA, GE Healthcare, Madison, WI) for the
measurement of femoral neck BMD. A bone-specific physical activity
questionnaire (BPAQ) (Weeks and Beck, 2008) was used to derive scores
for current (cBPAQ) and past (pBPAQ) physical activity.
Results: Retired rugby players had higher femoral neck BMD compared
to the non-rugby group (1.102±0.169 gcm-2 v 1.018±0.144 gcm-2,
p=0.004) but after adjustment for body mass, these differences were not
statistically significant (p=0.096). The rugby group had higher pBPAQ
scores (127.44±43.17 vs. 80.92±49.12, p<0.001) but there were no
differences in cBPAQ scores (3.55±5.22 vs. 2.56±2.74, p=0.659). In
the rugby group cBPAQ was moderately correlated with femoral neck
BMD (r=0.40, p <0.001) but there were no associations with pBPAQ and
BMD (r=0.06, p=0.581). No significant correlations between current or
past BPAQ and femoral neck BMD were seen in the non-rugby group.
Conclusion: The long-term effects of rugby participation on bone density
may be less important than current levels of bone-specific physical activity.
It is important that former rugby players continue to engage in osteogenic
physical activities post retirement from sport to support bone health.
P717
BILATERAL DISTAL RADIUS FRACTURES IN ELDERLY
PATIENTS WITH OSTEOPOROSIS: THE ROLE OF
CALCIUM AND VITAMIN D IN THE PREVENTION OF
REFRACTURES
P. Sevilla Ortega1, A. Aguirre Etxebarría1
1Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain
Objective: Distal radius fractures represent 15% of all fractures and up to
90% of wrist fractures. They may occur in women over the age of 40 after
low-energy trauma associated with underlying osteoporosis
[1]. Osteoporosis is a “silent disease” and fragility fracture is a common
presentation [2]. A correct approach to these patients should be followed
by a secondary prevention of osteoporosis in order to reduce the risk of
suffering new fractures.
S345
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Our objective is to review the incidence of bilateral distal radius fractures
and refractures in elderly patients with osteoporotic bone that have been
susceptible to conservative treatment.
Methods: We present a 82-year-old female patient with non-simultaneous
bilateral dorsally displaced distal radius fracture (2009 and 2012) treated
conservatively, as well as its subsequent evolution.
Results: After the first episode, treatment with calcium and vitamin D
was started for underlying osteoporosis, diagnosed by bone densitometry.
On two occasions, controls were carried out at 1, 2, 4 and 6 weeks until
consolidation of fractures was observed in plain radiography (Figure 1).
One year later, the patient was asymptomatic and had resumed normal
activities.
Figure 1. PA and lateral right wrist radiograph (2012). Results after six
weeks of conservative treatment.
Nine years after the last fracture, she fell from heights and was diagnosed
with a right distal radius refracture (Figure 2A), without indication for
surgical treatment. A closed reduction and immobilization with a below-
elbow cast splint are performed (Figure 2B), and a subsequent follow-up
similar to previous episodes was carried out. There have been no incidents
to date.
Figure 2. A. AP and lateral right wrist radiograph (2021). Dorsally
displaced distal radius refracture and distal ulna fracture. B. Right wrist
radiograph after a closed reduction and immobilization with cast.
Conclusion: Low-energy wrist fractures are hallmarks of osteoporosis.
Patients with osteoporosis who suffer fragility fractures have an increased
risk of suffering both refractures and fractures in other locations due to
their poor bone stock [3]. Adequate calcium intake, together with
sufficient levels of vitamin D, have proven to be a good option to
maintain a healthy bone state [4]. However nowadays it doesn’t
completely eliminate the possibility of future injuries.
References
1.
Bahari S, et al. Injury 2007;38:759
2.
Tulipan J, et al. Orthop Clin North Am 2015;46:541
3.
Talbot JC, et al. Injury 2007;38:1236
4.
Martín-Laguna D. Rev Osteoporos Metab Miner 2019;11(Suppl
1):S13
P718
RETIRED RUGBY PLAYERS POSSESS SUPERIOR LEAN
MASS AND STRENGTH BUT NOT MUSCLE QUALITY
I. Entwistle1, P. Francis2, M. Lees3, P. Hume4, K. Hind1
1Durham University, Durham, UK, 2Institute of Technology Carlow,
Carlow, Ireland, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 4Auckland
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
Objective: The age-associated loss of muscle mass and strength,
otherwise known as sarcopenia, represents a major health challenge.
We investigated the impact of previous participation in rugby codes by
assessing differences in lean mass, body fat percentage, muscle strength
and quality in retired rugby players and retired noncontact athletes and
nonathletes.
Methods: In this cross-sectional study, 88 retired male rugby players
(46.1±10.5 y; 100±15.1 kg; 1.80±0.08 m; 42 elite; 46 community level)
and 51 retired noncontact athletes and nonathletes (49.7±14.4 y; 86.7
±14.5 kg; 1.77±0.06 m) were assessed for body composition using
DXA. Appendicular lean mass (ALM) and appendicular lean mass index
(ALMI) were calculated. Cohorts from the rugby group (n=59) and non-
rugby group (n=42) underwent hand grip strength testing and muscle
quality (hand grip strength per unit of arms lean mass; MQ) was
calculated. Sarcopenia prevalence was determined, using the following
cut-points: ALMI <7.23 kg/m2; hand grip strength <37.2 kg.
Results: Total lean mass (68.3±9.1 kg vs. 57.9±8.0 kg), ALM (32.7
±5.0 kg vs. 27.3±4.3 kg), and hand grip strength (51.7±8.8 kg vs. 44.1
±7.6 kg) were significantly higher in the rugby group (p<0.001). There
were no between-group differences in body fat percentage or MQ. The
prevalence of sarcopenia was significantly higher in the non-rugby group,
ALMI <7.23 kgm2 (8% vs. 0%; p=0.017); hand grip strength <37.2 kg
(19% vs. 3%; p=0.015).
Conclusion: Retired competitive rugby code players have superior levels
of hand grip strength and lean mass in later life. It is not clear if this
represents genetic influences on self-selection or a sustained effect of
previous participation in a highly physical sport.
P719
MULTIPLE MYELOMA SCREENING WITHIN A FRACTURE
LIAISON SERVICE (FLS)
G. Agarwal1, C. Milan1, Z. Mohsin1, S. Mahoney1, G. White1, P.
Stevens1, S. Connacher1, P. Osborne1, R. Eckert1, A. Sami1, D. Prieto-
Alhambra1, K. Ramasamy1, M. K. Javaid1
S346
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Oxfordshire Fracture Prevention Service, Oxford University Hospitals
Foundation NHS Trust, Oxford, UK
Objective: A key role of the FLS is screening for secondary causes of
osteoporosis. Myeloma is a recognised secondary cause and early
diagnosis improves survival. In 2019, the Royal Osteoporosis Society
recommended that all patients attending FLS have universal screening
for myeloma based on serum electrophoresis, serum free light chains
and urine electrophoresis. This study aimed to examine the impact of
universal myeloma screening within an FLS.
Methods: We sampled all patients seen by the Oxfordshire FLS between
January-April 2018. Screening is only recommended in those who are
recommended antiosteoporosis therapy. The completion rates and
outcomes of screening were checked using the hospital and FLS
databases.
Results: Of 950 patients identified by the FLS, 584 had some form of
myeloma screening. Of these, 438 (75%) were female, 371 (64%) aged
over 75 y and 178 (30%) sustained a hip fracture. Overall, 577 (99%) had
serum electrophoresis measured, 525 (90%) had serum free light chains
and 407 (70%) had urine electrophoresis. 327 (56%) patients had complete
screening. Three patients had newly diagnosed myeloma and referred to
Haematology services. Furthermore, 46 patients had a detectable serum
paraprotein with a likely diagnosis of monoclonal gammopathy of
uncertain significance (MGUS) requiring annual surveillance.
Conclusion: Addition of universal myeloma screening to laboratory
testing, identified myeloma in 1 in 195 patients, and its precursor state
MGUS in 1 in 13 patients, which may have otherwise been missed.
Further analysis with long-term follow-up is needed to clearly define
the value of diagnosing MGUS within the FLS setting, establish the
benefits vs. costs and methods to improve screening completion rate.
Table.
Outcome
n
% Female
% Aged
over 75 y
% Hip
fracture
% Complete
Screen
Normal
509
75%
61%
30%
64%
Myeloma – New
3
67%
100%
0%
33%
Myeloma – Known
1
0%
100%
0%
0%
MGUS – New
46
70%
83%
39%
61%
MGUS – Known
24
83%
79%
33%
63%
Hypogammopathy
128
70%
75%
43%
78%
Polyclonal
hypergammopathy
41
71%
63%
29%
76%
P720
MANAGEMENT OF HIP FRACTURE DURING THE COVID-19
PANDEMIC
M. Komornicki1, M. Buttazzoni1, B. Boietti1, A. V. Kitaigrodsky1, M. E.
Vera1, P. A. I. Slullitel1, G. S. Carabelli1, J. D. Barla1, G. G. García
Barreiro1, J. A. Benchimol1, M. Diehl1
1Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Capital Federal, Argentina
Objective: The outbreak of coronavirus disease produced a significant
impact in health care systems and led to changes in usual hip fracture
(HF) care. In Argentina a nationwide mandatory and prolonged lockdown
was implemented. HF is associated with a higher risk of new fractures and
mortality. The impact of COVID pandemic on HF patients in Argentina is
unknown. This study aimed to compare treatment and outcomes after HF
during the pandemic vs. the same period in 2019.
Methods: Observational retrospective study comparing 2020 (03/20/
2020 - 07/20/2020) and 2019 (03/20/2019 - 03/20/2019) cohort. Data
were obtained from the institutional HF registry and the electronic
medical record. Clinical Frail Scale and Charlson Index were assessed.
In 2020 in-hospital bisphosphonate (BP) use and telemedicine were
implemented. Bivariate analysis of qualitative variables was performed
with chi2 or Fisher and for quantitative variables, t-test or Wilcoxon.
STATA 14 software was used.
Results: Both cohorts (2019 n:113, 2020 n:74) were similar in age (88 vs.
86.5), sex, BMI, previous fractures, osteoporosis treatment, fracture type,
PTH and vitamin D, but 2020 cohort presented greater frailty (p<0.0001)
and Charlson index (p<0.0001). Covid test was negative in all patients.
Median time to surgery was 1 (1-2) d (p 0.9) and in-hospital
endocrinological evaluation was performed in >80% in both cohorts (p
0.61). BP treatment was 30% in 2019 vs. 54% in 2020 (p 0.009).
Zoledronic acid (ZOL) was used in 85% of cases without severe adverse
effects. Endocrinological follow up was 25% in the 2019 cohort vs.
43.1% (telemedicine) in 2020 (p 0.01). No significant differences in
hospital stay, new fractures, readmissions and 3-month mortality were
found.
Conclusion: Surgical and in-hospital evaluation were similar during
Covid pandemic. Postoperative ZOL was safe and increased access to
treatment. Telemedicine improved follow-up. Length of hospitalization,
readmissions and 3-month mortality were similar.
P721
FAMILY SPONDYLOARTHITIS: RESULTS OF A
MONOCENTRIC STUDY
F. Mechid1, N. Bahaz1, C. Dahou-Makhloufi1
1University of Algiers Benyoucef Benkhedda, Mohamed Lamine
Debaghine Hospital., Algiers, Algeria
S347
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Objective: To report our experience about observations of families of
spondyloarthritic patients, followed in our department.
Methods: This is a retrospective study including patients with
spondyloarthritis during a period from 2010 to 2020 with family history
of spondyloarthritis. The diagnosis of spondyloarthritis was retained
according to the New-York, AMOR and/or ASAS criteria. We have
described the clinical, biological and therapeutic aspects of these patients.
Results: We identified eight families of spondyloarthritis composed of 12
men and 5 women. The mean age of onset was 28.56 y (14-58 y). There
were 13 cases of ankylosing spondylitis, 1 case of enteropathic arthritis, 2
case of psoriatic arthritis, and 1 case of late onset peripheral
spondyloarthritis. Thirteen patients had axial and peripheral form.
Uveitis was associated in 5 cases. Sacroiliitis has been detected in 14
patients. All patients had at least one severity factor: onset before age
16 (1 case), dactylitis (1 case), increased CRP (7 cases), coxitis (9 cases),
and NSAID failure (14 cases). Four patients were tested for HLA-B27
and three were positive. Among 17 patients, 11 required biotherapy and 3
required total hip replacement.
Conclusion: Our findings reveal that ankylosing spondylitis is the most
common form of family spondyloarthritis. The majority of our patients
required biotherapy and three benefited from a hip replacement.
P722
IMMUNOGENICITY AND SAFETY OF 23-VALENT
PNEUMOCOCCAL POLYSACCHARIDE VACCINE IN
PATIENTS WITH IMMUNO-INFLAMMATORY RHEUMATIC
DISEASES
N. V. Muravyeva1, B. S. Belov1, M. S. Naumtseva1, M. M. Baranova1,
M. V. Cherkasova1, T. V. Korotaeva1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To study the immunogenicity and safety of the 23-valent
polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine (PPV-23) in patients with
immuno-inflammatory rheumatic diseases (IIRDs).
Methods: The open prospective study included 145 patients (96 women,
49 men, age 22-76 y). Rheumatoid arthritis was diagnosed in 79 patients,
ankylosing spondylitis – in 31, systemic scleroderma – in 16, psoriatic
arthritis – in 12, and dermatomyositis/polymyositis – in 7. At the time of
inclusion in the study, most patients had high or moderate disease
activity. Most patients had at least two cases of lower respiratory tract
infections (bronchitis, pneumonia) in their immediate history, 2 patients
reported a monthly exacerbation of chronic sinusitis, 1 patient – the
development of otitis every 2-3 months, requiring the use of antibacterial
drugs. PPV-23 was administered in an amount of 1 dose (0.5 ml)
subcutaneously in the deltoid muscle against the background of anti-
rheumatic therapy. The level of antibodies to pneumococcal capsular
polysaccharide was determined using the EIA PCP IgG kit before
vaccination, 1, 3 and 12 months after vaccination.
Results: At 1, 3 and 12 months after vaccination, the concentration of
antibodies to pneumococcal capsule polysaccharide was significantly
higher compared to the baseline values (p=0.01, p=0.005 и p=0.01,
respectively). In 80.7% of patients, vaccination tolerance was good.
Reactions at the injection site (pain, swelling and hyperemia of the skin
up to 2 cm in diameter), resolved independently after 1-5 days, were
observed in 26 patients. In 2 patients, a severe local reaction was
registered in the form of pain in the arm, infiltration and hyperemia of
the skin up to 8 and 15 cm in diameter, respectively, accompanied by low-
grade fever in one patient for 2 days, and febrile fever in the other for 3
days. In both cases, these symptoms were completely stopped after
administration of paracetamol and antihistamines. Exacerbation of
IIRDs and the emergence of new autoimmune disorders were not
detected. During the follow-up period, no patients developed lower
respiratory tract infections. Patients suffering from frequent sinusitis and
otitis reported the absence of these infections after vaccination.
Conclusion: The obtained data indicate satisfactory immunogenicity and
good tolerability of PPV-23 in patients with IIRDs. Further studies are
needed to better assess the immunogenicity and safety of vaccine, as well
as to study of the influence of anti-rheumatic therapy on the effectiveness
of immunization.
P723
RISK OF SUBSEQUENT FRACTURE ADMISSION IN MEXICO
USING REAL WORLD DATA
M. K. Javaid1, E. S. Tejeda-Chávez2, F. Torres-Naranjo3, L. Mendez4, J.
C. Viveros5, A. Olascoaga-Gómez de León6, R. Garcia-Gaeta2, M. Y.
Perez-Avalos7, R. Pinedo-Villanueva1, S. Wullich8, M. Caló8, C. A.
Ruiz-Esparza-Macías2
1University of Oxford, NDORMS, Oxford, UK, 2Servicios de Salud,
Jalisco, Mexico, 3Centro de Investigación Ósea y de la Composición
Corporal, CIO, Mexico, 4University of Medicine UNAM, Mexico City,
Mexico, 5ISSTE Leon, Guanajuato, Mexico, 6National Institute of
Rehabilitation, Mexico City, Mexico, 7Centro Universitario del Norte,
Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico, 8International
Osteoporosis Foundation/ Latin America Region, Buenos Aires,
Argentina
Objective: It is well recognised that patients admitted with a fragility
fracture are at high risk of subsequent fracture. The expected rates of re-
fracture in the first few years are essential when modelling the expected
benefits and budget impact from Fracture Liaison Services to inform their
prioritisation for policymakers. At present, there is a paucity of local re-
fracture data for Mexico.
Methods: We compared the rates of re-fracture over a 1-y period using
routine admission data from the Health Services Jalisco, one of the health
systems in the western region of Mexico (state of Jalisco). Fracture sites
were coded using ICD10 discharge codes into the hip, spine and other
fracture sites, excluding the face, digits, skull and scaphoid. To exclude
duplicate admission coding, subsequent admissions within 90 d of the
index fracture admission date with the same ICD10 code were excluded.
Results: In 2017, there were 1,007 admissions with fragility fractures
leading to occupancy of 7712 bed days. 69% of all fragility fracture
admissions were for hip fractures (78.9% of all fragility fracture bed
days). Of the admissions with hip fractures, men had a 2-d longer length
of stay than women (p=0.042) even though they were 4 years younger
(p<0.001). Women with hip fractures made up 46.2% of admitted
fractures in adults aged 50 y and over, and 50% of total bed days. Men
with hip fractures made up 22.8% of all admitted fractures and 28.2% of
total bed days. Few patients (2.8%) were admitted with spine fractures.
After excluding readmissions within 90 d with the same fracture site code,
43 patients (4.2%) had readmission for fracture within 12 months of the
index fracture. 22 patients (3.3%) were readmitted with a second hip
fracture and had a nonsignificant longer length of stay from first
admission (7 vs. 8.5 median days (p=0.12)).
Conclusion: We have described the local refracture readmission rates at
12 months following index admissions for hip, spine and other fractures
for one of the health system in the western region of Mexico. These
findings will be critical for understanding the potential patient, clinical
and economic benefits from Fracture Liaison Services.
S348
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Table. Index fractures in 2017:
P724
"CHARCOT'S FOOT": A DIAGNOSIS NOT TO BE MISSED!
R. Hassani1, M. Djennane2
1University Hospital Center of Tizi-ouzou, Dept. of Rheumatology, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria,
Objective: Charcot's foot is a rare nervous osteoarthropathy; described by
Charcot; it is an extremely serious complication of diabetic neuropathy
leading to deformities of the foot by the non-infectious destruction of
bones and joints. We report an observation. The interest of this
observation is to show on the one hand the role of the education of
diabetic patients in the early diagnosis of Charcot's foot, on the other hand
the difficulty of management requiring a multidisciplinary team.
Case report: 32-year-old patient, type 1 diabetic, diagnosed 11 years ago,
poorly balanced under insulin therapy and at the stage of degenerative
complications: CKD stage 3, diabetic neuropathy of both lower limbs.
He presented in consultation with a swollen right foot, melanodermal with
enlargement of the anteroposterior diameter and lateral diameter, plantar
flattening, associated with lymphedema extending to the leg, progressing
for 1 year in total indolence and rendering the difficult walk. Standard
radiographs reveal diffuse bone transparency, destructive lesions of the
talocrural joint with multiple geodes. Biology: glycemia: 2.2 g/l, HbA1c:
9%, absence of inflammatory syndrome, Ca: 85mg/l, clearance: 58 ml/min.
Charcot's foot affects 9% of diabetics with sensory neuropathy and the
involvement of young people is rare. The average age of diagnosis of
diabetic neuroarthropathy is 57 y, with an average duration of diabetes of
15 y (80% over 10 y and 60% over 15 y). This impairment was observed
in our young diabetic patient with 11 y of development of diabetes due to
chronic glycemic imbalance. Charcot's neuroarthropathy still suffers from
delayed diagnosis due to the lack of specificity of the initial clinical signs.
It can induce irreversible bone complications responsible for high
morbidity and mortality. The prognosis depends on an early diagnosis
and treatment with the aim of limiting the deformity through the
immobilization of the cast and the discharge.
Conclusion: Regular and rigorous podiatry examination in diabetic
patients allows early diagnosis and adequate treatment of any
neurological or vascular complication.
P725
CLINICAL PROFILE OF OSTEOPOROTIC PATIENTS
TREATED WITH ZOLEDRONIC ACID
S. N. Negadi1, E. Tabti1, S. Benabadji1, A. Lounici1
1Internal Medicine Dept., University Hospital Center, Laboratory of
Research on Diabetes, Faculty of Medicine University of Tlemcen,
Tlemcen, Algeria,
Objective: Prevention of fractures with bisphosphonates has been shown
most clearly in patients with osteoporosis. Zoledronate is administered by
intravenous injection at intervals of 1 year or longer, it is preferred over oral
bisphosphonates by a majority of patients,¹ and it has had a satisfactory
safety profile.² ³ Zoledronic acid decreases the risk of vertebral and
nonvertebral (including hip) fractures. The objectives of the study are to
identify patients with osteoporosis treated with zoledronate.
Methods: Prospective study starting from July 2017 and ongoing
involving osteoporotic patients (postmenopausal, postcortisonic and
secondary) with or without fracture treated with zoledronic acid. A
biological assessment (serum creatinine, calcium level and vitamin D),
a BMD test and oral evaluation were performed before the infusion of
zoledronic acid. Calcium 1000 mg/d and vitamin D 800 IU/d have been
prescribed for these patients. We discussed with the patient the rare
potential risks of atypical fracture of the femur or osteonecrosis of the jaw.
Results: We collected 14 patients treated with zoledronate, 11 women
(cortisonic osteoporosis: 7 patients, postmenopausal osteoporosis: 3
patients and osteoporosis secondary to primary hyperparathyroidism: 1
patient) and 3 men (cortisonic osteoporosis), the average age is 59 y. The
pathologies justifying corticosteroid therapy were rheumatoid arthritis in
6 patients, 2 cases of lupus and 2 cases of sarcoidosis. The mean T-score
at the hip was -2.6 and the mean T-score at the spine was -2.9. The risk
factors for fracture were age >60 (10 patients), BMI <19 (3 patients),
history of fracture in 10 patients (hip: 5 patients, vertebra: 2 patients,
wrist: 3 patients and ankle: 3 patients), history of prolonged corticosteroid
therapy (10 patients), early menopause (2 patients), type 2 diabetes (3
patients), celiac disease (1 patient), Vit D deficiency (6 patients) and
treatments promoting osteoporosis (proton pump inhibitors: 9 patients
and levothyroxine: 2 patients).
Conclusion: Zoledronic acid once a year is an effective and generally
well tolerated treatment option for patients with osteoporosis, its
indication in our patients was severe osteoporosis with severe fracture.
References:
1.
McClung M. et al. Bone 2007;41:122.
2.
Black DM, et al. N Engl J Med 2007;356:1809.
3.
Lyles KW, et al. N Engl J Med 2007;357:1799.
P726
POST-FRA CTU RE C ARE P ROGRAMMES START
OFFSETTING INITIAL INVESTMENT TWO YEARS AFTER
THEIR IMPLEMENTATION: PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
FROM A MICROSIMULATION MODEL OF BENEFIT AND
BUDGET IMPACT
R. Pinedo-Villanueva1, E. Burn1, C. Cooper2, M. K. Javaid1, CTF
Partnership Study Group3
1University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 2University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK, 3Nyon, Switzerland
Objective: To describe the yearly incremental costs and quality-adjusted
life years (QALYs) of a postfracture care (PFC) programme
implementation in comparison to current practice in various countries.
Total
Women
Men
Site
Site
Site
Total
Hips
Spines
Other
Hips
Spines
Other
Hips
Spines
Other
n
1,007
695
28
284
465
18
183
230
10
101
Age (y)
73.4 (13)
77.6 (11.7)
68.3 (12.9)
63.6 (10.6)
79.0 (10.9)
72.4 (12.8)
64.2 (10.5)
74.7 (12.7)
60.8 (9.6)
62.6 (10.7)
Length of stay
(median, IQR)
7.6 (2-11)
8 (3-12)
4 (1- 10.5)
2 (1-5)
6 (3-12)
3 (1-10)
2 (0-4)
8 (4-13)
4 (2- 13)
2 (1-5)
Number of
bed days
7,712
6,082
210
1,420
3909
135
813
2173
75
607
S349
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: A microsimulation model was developed where adult men and
women aged 50 y and older with a fragility fracture of the hip, spine, or
other major site transit through health states of subsequent refracture of
any site, or refracture free taking into account imminent fracture risk. The
model was run for five years over monthly cycles. Introduction of a PFC
programme was compared to current practice for several countries.
Hospital inpatient and outpatient, social care, and secondary fracture
prevention costs were considered, with number of refractures and
QALYs as primary outcomes. All main antiosteoporotic drugs were
available to be recommended to patients, each characterised by a fracture
site specific time-lag effect and relative risk reduction over baseline
refracture rates. PFC performance for identification, assessment,
treatment, and monitoring were built into the model reflecting achievable
treatment and adherence rates.
Results: Cost levels and distribution over time were found to be highly
sensitive to medication time-lag effects for vertebral, hip and other
fracture sites. With many drugs taking 6-12 months after treatment
initiation to reveal their full effect, 84% of the 5-y added costs of PFC
over current practice were concentrated on the first year, due to the
combination of PFC (especially medication) costs as well as hospital
and social care for patients who still refracture. The second year reported
35% of the 5-y incremental costs, with the PFC alternative offsetting
initial investment after that. QALY gains during the first year were 4%
of the total 5-y gain over current practice, with the following years
increasingly contributing between 17% and 30%. The figure shows the
percentage of 5-y incremental costs and QALYs gained and their
distribution over the first 5 y of PFC operation.
Conclusion: Our model shows that the investment necessary to
implement a PFC programme not only generates significant and growing
quality of life gains for patients, but also that its annual costs become
lower than those under current practice after the second year of PFC
implementation.
Acknowledgment: This study received funding from the International
Osteoporosis Foundation.
P727
UNIQUE ASSOCIATION: RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS, LUPUS,
SYSTEMIC SCLERODERMA AND GOUGEROT-SJOGREN
SYNDROME
R. Hassani1, M. Djennane2, L. Igueni1
1University Hospital Center of Tizi-ouzou, Dept. of Rheumatology, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria,
Objective: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease, often
associated with other diseases in this family. We report an exclusive
observation of an overlap syndrome where RA is associated with lupus,
scleroderma sine scleroderma and secondary Gourgeot-Sjögren
syndrome.
Case report: 51-year-old patient with a history of hypothyroidism and
hypertension, has presented an erosive and deforming RA for a dozen
years, initially put on DMARDs then on anti-TNFα (Adalimumab),
hospitalized for Raynaud's phenomenon, erythematous lesions infiltrated
in the interarticular areas of the fingers, arms and anterior face of the thighs,
erythema malar, telangiectasias in the neckline and upper face of the back
with non-scarring alopecia associated with inflammatory polyarthralgia, a
dry cough, dyspnea of exertion and dry eye syndrome. Biology: leukopenia
3000 e/mm³, ESR: 85 mm H1, CRP: 10mg/l, liver enzymes: 2 nle, renal
function:normal and 24 h proteinuria: negative. Immunology: FAN
positive with anti DNA 560 IU, anti-SSA / Ro (52/60) and anti-Scl70
Ab: positive. Bone and articular ultrasound: bilateral radio-carpal synovitis,
Cardiac ultrasound: without abnormalities, thoracic CT: interstitial
pulmonary fibrosis located in the basal segment of the lower lobes.
Functional respiratory test: normal. Capillaroscopy: rarefying organic
microangiopathy. Biopsy of accessory salivary glands: Chisholm grade 4
lymphocytic sialadenitis. Bone densitometry finds osteoporosis. The
diagnosis of overlap syndrome: RA, scleroderma sine scleroderma, lupus,
associated with secondary Gougerot-Sjögren syndrome was retained in this
patient. Under plaquenil, mycophenolate mofetil, diltiazem, adalimumab,
low-dose prednisone, the outcome was favorable
Conclusion: The coexistence of several autoimmune pathologies
involves diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties. The pathophysiological
mechanisms underlying these associations have not yet been elucidated,
but a predisposing genetic ground is increasingly implicated.
P728
REYNOLDS SYNDROME: A CASE REPORT
R. Hassani1, M. Djennane2, L. Igueni1
1University Hospital Center of Tizi-ouzou, Dept. of Rheumatology, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria,
Objective: In systemic scleroderma (SS), the prevalence of liver damage
is approximately 1%. Cholangitis is the most frequently described liver
disease in association with scleroderma, constituting a rarely described
entity: Reynolds syndrome. We report an observation.
Case report: 47-year-old patient, mother of 02 children after 02 early
abortions and 07 premature deliveries; hospitalized for exploration of
Raynaud's phenomenon associated with inflammatory polyarthralgia.
The examination found a patient with a generalized melanodermal
appearance, skin thickening of the fingers of the hands extending beyond
the metacarpophalangeal joints; unilateral edema of the left foot painful,
hot, keeping the cup with pulse present. A biological inflammatory
syndrome, hepatic cytolysis, hepatic anicteric cholestasis.
Immunological assessment: centromeric FAN> 1/1000, cytoplasmic
1/320: anti-centromere B antibodies, anti-mitochondria M2 antibodies
positive with anti-cardiolipin IgM 23 MPL/ml and anti-prothrombin
IgM 19 MPL/ml. Capillaroscopy: severe rarefying organic
microangiopathy. A normal respiratory function test with FVC: 92%.
Computed tomography (high resolution): does not find signs of interstitial
lung disease. Cardiac ultrasound without abnormalities. Esogastroduodenal
fibroscopy: hatched appearance of the duodenal mucosa, the
anatomopathological study of the biopsies of which shows total villous
atrophy which may correspond to celiac disease. Arterial echodoppler of
the lower limbs: occlusion of the distal left pedial artery. The diagnosis
retained is Reynolds syndrome (limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis +
primary biliary cholangitis) associated with secondary APS; celiac disease
has not been confirmed. Under nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
diltiazem, ursodeoxycholic acid, Low molecular weight heparin then anti-
vitamin K, the evolution was favorable.
Conclusion: The association SS-Primary biliary cholangitis constitutes a
rare but not fortuitous pair, which imposes an increased monitoring in
order not to ignore the impact of the hepatic damage on the overall
prognosis of scleroderma and the possibility of association with other
autoimmune pathologies.
S350
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P729
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HAND GRIP STRENGTH
AND REGIONAL MUSCLE MASS IN ELDERLY ASIANS
J. Chan1, Y.-C. Lu2, R. O. Kosik3
1Postbaccalaureate Prehealth Studies Program, New York University, New
York, USA, 2Dept. of Radiology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Dept. of Radiology, School of Medicine,
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Objective: Although previous research has demonstrated a correlation
between muscle strength and regional muscle mass, few studies have
investigated the relationship between hand grip strength (HGS) and
muscle mass in older Asian adults. This study aims to determine the
relationship between HGS and muscle mass in older Asian adults.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the DXA records of older adults
from one medical institution in Taipei, Taiwan, from January 2019 to
September 2020. The inclusion criteria were: 1) aged 60 and older, 2)
underwent a full-body DXA scan, and 3) performed hand grip
measurements. Duplicate results, incomplete records, patients with a
history of stroke, and patients with other neurological diseases were
excluded. Regional skeletal muscle mass (upper and lower extremities
as well as trunk) was measured using DXA. HGS was measured using a
Jamar handheld dynamometer, with the maximum value of three attempts
recorded for analysis. Sarcopenia was diagnosed according to the
definition provided by the Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia (2019).
Results: Of the 907 healthy participants, the prevalence of sarcopenia was
33.89% in men and 13.77% in women. In both sexes, HGS and regional
muscle mass showed a consistent decline after 60 y of age. The rates of
decline per decade in upper extremity muscle mass, lower extremity
muscle mass, trunk muscle mass, and HGS were 6.69%, 4.95%, 3.54%,
and 12.30%, respectively, in men, and 3.35%, 4.44%, 1.81%, and 12.48%,
respectively, in women. In men, HGS significantly correlated with upper
(r=0.576, p<0.001) and lower extremity muscle mass (r=0.532, p<0.001).
In women, the correlations between HGS and upper extremity muscle
mass (r=0.262, p<0.001) and lower extremity muscle mass (r=0.364,
p<0.001) were less strong, though also statistically significant.
Conclusion: Muscle mass and HGS decline with advancing age in both
older men and women though the correlation is stronger in men than in
women. HGS measurements are an accurate proxy of muscle mass in
older Asian adults, particularly males.
P730
ASSOCIATION OF SPONDYLOARTHRITIS AND CELIAC
DISEASE: A CASE REPORT
R. Hassani1, M. Djennane2, L. Igueni1
1University Hospital Center of Tizi-ouzou, Dept. of Rheumatology, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria,
Objective: Ankylosing spondyloarthritis is a chronic inflammatory
rheumatism in which the general signs such as weight loss, anorexia,
pallor are not very important and may be part of an associated condition.
We report an observation where these signs are the result of an association
with Celiac disease.
Case report: This is a 34-year-old young woman with a history of
hypothyroidism, followed for 5 y for axial ankylosing spondyloarthritis
with bilateral sacroileitis treated with a biological agent (anti-TNFα).
Under treatment appear diffuse polyalgia, muscle wasting with weight
loss leading to hospitalization. The clinical examination found a patient
in general preserved condition, skin-mucous paleness, afebrile, weighing
47 kg. Cervical hyperlordosis, exaggerated dorsal kyphosis, without
spinal stiffness; bilateral scapulalgia with slight limitation of abduction.
Generalized atrophy with muscle weakness. A normal neurological exam.
Biology: VS: 39 H1, CRP: negative, HB: 9.7g/dl (normochromic
normocytic anemia), CA: 103mg/l ↑, Phos: 17mg/l ↓, 24-h calciuria: 38
mg/24-h ↓, PTH: 1447pg/ml ↑, albumin: 47 g/l, Vit D collapsed at 4 ng/ml
↓↓, renal and hepatic results are normal. Radiology: standard radiographs
show: diffuse bone demineralization, funnel-shaped deformation of the
thorax, several tiered vertebral compression (fish vertebrae), pelvis in
the heart of a playing card; bone densitometry: objective osteoporosis with
a spine T-score: -5, neck: -4. Signs in favor of deficiency osteomalacia.
The etiological research concluded with celiac disease on the following
results: positive celiac serology: anti-tissue transglutaminase antibody
IgA: 258.7 IU/ml, esogastroduodenal fibroscopy with duodenal biopsy
found: total villous atrophy stage 4 according to the Marsh classification.
The treatment undertaken is: a gluten-free diet, calcium and vitamin D
supplementation; further treatment with IV bisphosphonates. The short-
term course resulted from complete pain relief with weight gain and
normalization of biological indices.
Celiac disease is a dysimmune disease whose digestive symptoms are the
best known, however, joint involvement (polyarthralgia, arthritis,
osteoporosis) is often precocious and unrecognized. Anemia and chronic
asthenia are all symptoms that should motivate the search for specific
antibodies. The goal of early diagnosis is to prevent the onset of other
systemic conditions and to avoid complications such as fractures or
cancer, especially lymphoma. Celiac disease is associated with an
autoimmune disease in almost a third of cases (rheumatoid arthritis,
Gougerot-Sjögren syndrome). Knowing these potential associations
makes it possible to make an earlier diagnosis in patients whose only
manifestation is the associated disease. The association of
spondyloarthritis and celiac disease is rare. Only a few observations have
been reported in the literature.
Conclusion: The celiac disease-SPA association is rare, but it suggests
the existence of physiopathological mechanisms common to these two
pathologies.
P731
INFECTIONS UNDER BIOTHERAPIES
R. Hassani1, M. Djennane2
1University Hospital Center of Tizi-ouzou, Dept. of Rheumatology, Tizi-
ouzou, Algeria,
Objective: Biotherapies are now part of the therapeutic arsenal of chronic
inflammatory rheumatism such as rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing
spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis. Commonly used biotherapies are anti-
TNF agents (infliximab, etanercept, adalimumab and certolizumab), an
antibody targeting the B cell (rituximab), an inhibitor of lymphocyte co-
stimulation (abatacept) and an antibody targeting the IL-receptor. 6
(tocilizumab). These biological agents are started up in a specialized
hospital environment. These biotherapies obey initiation rules according
to the data of the marketing authorization, national and international
recommendations. These biological agents are highly effective in chronic
inflammatory rheumatism.
Methods: This is a descriptive retrospective study including patients
hospitalized in our rheumatology department between 2006-2018
undergoing biotherapy.
Results: Of the 265 files included, we found 23 infections in 18 patients
(6.79%) who presented at least one infection under biotherapy: 13 women
and 5 men, on average 39 years old. It was either rheumatoid arthritis (10
patients), ankylosing spondylitis (8 patients), or psoriatic arthritis (1
patient). All patients were on conventional treatment before switching
to biotherapy. Infections occurred with adalimumab in 39%, etanercept
in 39%, tocilizumab in 8.6% (there were no infections observed in
patients on infliximab). The infection was of bacterial origin in 87.07%
of cases: 5 pulmonary infections (2 under adalimumab and 3 under
etanercept) including 2 tuberculosis (one under adalimumab and one
under etanercept), 4 ENT infections (2 under etanercept, one under
tocilizumab and one under adalimumab), 4 urinary tract infections
(including 3 under adalimumab and one under etanercept), a digestive
infection (under adalimumab) a soft tissue abscess (under adalimumab), 2
genital (one under adalimumab, one under etanercept), an ocular under
S351
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
etanercept, 3 cutaneous (one under tocilizumab, one under etanercept and
one under adilimumab). A viral origin of the infection was noted in 8.69%
of cases: one under adalimumab and one under etanercept, while for
mycoses it only represented 4.24% of the aetiologies identified.
Treatment was medical in 100% of cases and the outcome was favorable
in all patients without recourse to definitive discontinuation of biotherapy.
Conclusion: The infections reported in our series are clearly more
frequent under adalimumab-type treatment and bacteria are the pathogens
most implicated in our patients, which is confirmed by the data in the
literature.
P732
RESEARCH ON THE DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF
OSTEOPOROSIS IN DEPARTMENT OF RHEUMATOLOGY &
IMMUNOLOGY IN CHINA
L. Xiaomei1, Z. Xiaofeng1
1Rheumatology & Immunology Dept., Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Peking, China
Objective: To investigate the level of osteoporosis diagnosis and
treatment among doctors in the Dept. of Rheumatism & Immunology in
China.
Methods: From October 1, 2020 to March 31, 2021, 1000 rheumatology
immunologists from 29 provinces nationwide were involved through
Chinese Rheumatism Data Center (CRDC). The scanning tools, the
diagnostic criteria, and the therapeutic regimens for osteoporosis were
investigated.
Results: More than 60% (64.2%) of rheumatologists believe that rapid
bone loss occurs within 6 months of glucocorticoids (GCs) use. However,
half of the rheumatologists approximately (50.1%) were not familiar with
the diagnostic criteria of osteoporosis. 72.7% of rheumatologists said that
they will use DXA for osteoporosis diagnosis. Only 28.7% of
rheumatologists said they will combine DXA and vertebral fracture
assessment to screen osteoporosis in patients. Besides, the use of fracture
risk assessment tool (FRAX) in rheumatology is about 25%. Among
these physicians, merely 20.6% of them choose bisphosphonate, calcium,
and vitamin D for patients at high fracture risk.
Conclusion: The screening, diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis in
rheumatology department has not attracted much attention. It is urgent to
improve the management level of osteoporosis and grasp the algorithm
for diagnosis and treatment leading to reduce the risk of osteoporosis
fracture effectively.
Acknowledgement: The authors thank the physicians who participated
in this investigation. Thank Chinese Rheumatism Data Center (CRDC)
for collecting the data. This work was supported by Sandoz (China)
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
P733
LEVELS OF 25OHD IN SUPPLEMENTED AND NOT
SUPPLEMENTED SUBJECTS AND RELATION WITH AGE,
BMI AND SEASONS
J. Mansur1
1Center of Endocrinology and Osteoporosis, La Plata, Argentina
Objective: To determine total 25OHD levels in supplemented and not
supplemented patients during 2020 and to analyze the relationship between
25OHD with age, BMI and season in the not supplemented group.
Methods: total 25OHD was dosed in 446 subjects. 278 patients did not
receive supplementation and 168 received it.
Results: Patients without supplementation were younger (51.9±14.9 vs.
62.5±11.1 y, p<0.0001) and had lower 25OHD levels (21.4±8.7 vs. 39.1
±10.8 ng/mL, p<0.0001). Not supplemented group: 25OHD levels were
similar in all ages and no differences were observed between normal and
overweight patients. Subjects with obesity had lower 25OHD than those
normal and overweight: 19.3±7.6 vs. 21.8±8.8 ng/mL, p=0.049. A
negative correlation was found between BMI and 25OHD: r:-0.13,
p=0.03. No correlation with age was observed. 25OHD seasonal values
were: winter (n:104) 18.6±7.0 ng/mL, fall (n:63) 23.4±9.0 ng/mL, spring
(n:79) 20.6±8.0 ng/mL and summer (n:32) 28.3±10.3 ng/mL, with
significant differences between winter and fall (p<0.01), winter and
summer (p<0.001), fall and summer (p<0.05) and spring and
summer (p<0.001). Supplemented group: 25OHD levels were: 100.000
IU/monthly (n:78): 43.6±11.2 ng/mL; 100.000 IU/bimonthy (n:20):
33.19±12.3 ng/mL; 100.000 IU/quarterly (n:17): 38.5±9.4 ng/mL;
1.000 IU//d (n:6): 34.33±7 ng/mL; 2.000 IU/d (n:22): 35.57±6 ng/mL;
3.000 IU/d (n:7): 35.67±11 ng/mL and 4.000 IU/d (n:5):39.76±8 ng/mL.
A desirable value of 25OHD >30 ng/mL was found in 82.6% and in
15,1% of the supplemented and not supplemented subjects respectively.
Conclusion: Patients supplemented with vitamin D had better 25OHD
values. In not supplemented subjects age is not a factor that influences
25OHD levels (maybe because older people have a lower level only when
exposed to the sun in summer). Obesity is associated with lower values
and a negative correlation between 25OHD and BMI was found. In
summer the values are higher although with an average lower than the
desirable levels. Supplemented subjects are older and achieved a
desirable 25OHD level regardless of the treatment regimen.
P734
ANTIOSTEOPOROTIC TREATMENT AFTER HIP FRACTURE
IS ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER ALL-CAUSE MORTALITY: A
NATIONWIDE POPULATION STUDY
T.-W. Tai1, C.-H. Wu2, C.-C. Li3, C.-F. Huang4, W.-P. Chan5
1Dept. of Orthopedics, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 2Dept.
of Family Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College
of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 3Dept. of Family
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of
Medicine, Tainan, 4Dept. of Family Medicine, National Yang Ming
Chiao Tung University Hospital, I-Lan, 5Dept. of Radiology, Wan Fang
Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Objective: Mortality after osteoporotic hip fractures is high.
Postoperative care is as important as surgery itself to prevent a second
fracture and improve outcomes, and the effect of anti-osteoporosis
treatment after hip fractures on overall mortality is controversial. This
nationwide population study aimed to determine whether anti-
osteoporosis treatment might reduce overall mortality after hip fracture
surgery.
Methods: We conducted this cohort study by using the National Health
Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan to identify patients
admitted for surgery because of hip fractures from 2008-2018. The
subsequent use and duration of antiosteoporotic medication and other
parameters were analyzed. The national death registration record was
retrieved to identify mortality.
Results: A total of 59,943 patients admitted for hip fracture surgery were
identified. The 22,494 patients (37.5%) who received anti-osteoporotic
medication showed a lower all-cause mortality rate than the other 37,449
patients (62.5%) who did not receive further treatment (hazard ratio (HR):
0.69, 95% confident interval (CI): 0.67-0.70, p<0.0001). Patients who
received antiosteoporotic medication for more than 1, 2, and 3 y had
reduced all-cause mortality risk, by 0.57 (0.54-0.60), 0.42 (0.38-0.46),
and 0.29 (0.26-0.33), respectively.
Conclusion: Antiosteoporosis treatment was associated with lower all-
cause mortality after hip fracture surgery. A longer duration of treatment
was also associated with lower mortality. Postoperative treatment for
osteoporosis is crucial for patients with hip fracture.
S352
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P735
ASSESSMENT OF THE RISK EXAMINATION AND THERAPY
INITIATION USING THE RUSSIAN NATIONAL REGISTRY
FOR THE PATIENTS ENROLLED INTO FRACTURE
LIAISON SERVICES
K. Belova1, A. Akhatov2, E. Bublik3, E. Gladkova4, K. Gordgeladze5, E.
Dudinskaya6, D. Ladygina7, M. Morozova8, Y. Polyakova9, L.
Sivordova9, V. Tanaev10, O. Lesnyak11
1Yaroslavl Regional Emergency Care Hospital N.V. Solovyev, Yaroslavl
State Medical University, Yaroslavl, 2Clinic of Innovation Medicine,
Kazan, 3“Central clinical hospital with outpatient health center” of the
Business Administration for the President of the Russian Federation,
Moscow, 4North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov, St.
Petersburg Clinical Rheumatology Hospital №25, St. Petersburg,
5Yaroslavl State Medical University, Yaroslavl, 6Russian National
Research Medical University N.I. Pirogov, Moscow, 7“Central clinical
hospital with outpatient health center” of the Business Administration for
the President of the Russian Federation, Moscow, 8Yaroslavl Regional
Emergency Care Hospital N.V. Solovyev, Yaroslavl, 9Research Institute
of Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky,
Volgograd, 10Clinical rheumatology hospital №25, St. Petersburg,
11North-Western State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov,
St. Petersburg; Clinical rheumatology hospital №25, St. Petersburg,
Russia
Objective: Fracture Liaison Services (FLS) aimed to prevent secondary
fragile fracture are established in many countries. For today 16 FLS have
been established in Russian Federation. A common national FLS
patients’ database was created for the unified data to analyze of FLS
effectiveness and reveal the main problems of their organization. This
study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of the risk examination and
therapy initiation in several FLS in RF using the registry data.
Methods: In June 2019, the Russian Association on Osteoporosis started
a project for the development of a registry of low energy fractures in
patients recruited to FLS (PROMETHEUS Registry). Today 6 FLS enter
the patients’ data in it. To assess the effectiveness of patient evaluations
and initiation of the therapy, we used the criteria of key performance
indicators [1].
Results: As of 10.03.2021, data on 387 patients were introduced in the
register, mean age is 71.95±10.23 y. Among them, 46.25% received a hip
fracture, 20.41% vertebral fractures, 16.80% proximal humerus fractures,
the rest had fractures of other localizations. The risk of fractures was
assessed in all the patients (100%). FRAX assessment was calculated in
95,61%, a high risk was found in 160 (41.18%). DXA was performed in
152 (39,28%) patients. Among those patients who needed this
examination to determine the risk of subsequent fractures after other
assessment it was performed in 63,24% cases. The risk of falls was
assessed in 100% of cases. It was determined to be high in 343
(88.63%) patients. Various measures to reduce this risk were
recommended in 304 (88.63%) patients, educational programs were
conducted in 299 (87.17%) cases. The appointment of antiosteoporotic
treatment was performed in 241 (62.27%). In 12 (3.10%) patients the risk
of subsequent fractures was determined as low. The most common
reasons for lack of treatment recommendation were the presence of
contraindications 70 (18.09%), among them the most common was
hypocalcemia (63 (16.27%) persons), and the need for further
examination 31 (8.01%).
Conclusion: The FLS Registry is a very important tool to improve care
for patients with osteoporotic fractures and to reveal the problems in the
organization of the medical care.Acknowledgements The PROMETEUS
Registry has received support from Amgen Grant for Russian Association
on Osteoporosis.
Reference: 1. Javaid MK, et al. Osteoporos Int 2020;31:1193.
P736
STATE OF THE BONE TISSUE IN CHILDREN DURING THE
GROWTH SPURT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE VDR GENE
POLYMORPHISM
T. Frolova1, D. McGowan2, N. Osman1, N. Stenkova3, I. Sinialeva1
1Dept. of Pediatrics, Kharkiv National Medical University, Kharkiv,
Ukriane, 2Spine & Orthopedic Surgery Associates, Kearney, USA,
3Dept. of Pediatrics, Kharkiv National Medical University, Kharkiv,
Ukraine
Objective: The research is aimed at establishing the specifics of the
structural and functional state of bone tissue in children during the growth
spurt with respect to the BSML polymorphism of the VDR gene.
Methods: 205 children aged 9-17 years were examined. They divided
into three groups: group I 50 children whose height increased by 8-12 cm
for the current year; group II included 46 children whose have grown to
greater than 12 cm in present year; group III included 109 children with
no growth spurt. All 205 children were evaluated with medical history,
physical exam, and calcaneal bone density measurement with Sonost-
2000. Bone density with DXA measured in 32 children. Z-score <-2.0
considered significantly low bone density in immature skeleton.
Results: A decrease in the BMD as observed through UD was diagnosed
in 24 children (48.0%) of group I, the Z-score in the group was -1.8 [-0.7; -
3.1];in 28 children (60.87%) of group II, the Z-score was-1.96 [-0.8; -2.4];
in 43 children (39.45%) of group 3, Z-score was -1.68 [0.4; -3.2]
(p˂0.05).DXA was used to examine 32 children with a decrease in
BMD. In 18 of them (56.25%) a decrease in BMD was diagnosed as shown
by ultrasound. The number of children with a decreased BMD in group I
reached 38.9% while in group II it was 50.0% (p˂0.05). The following
variants of polymorphisms of BSML were found: a normal genotype
variant was found in 48.76% of children; a heterozygous mutation was
detected in 41.32% of children; and 9.92% of children showed a
homozygous mutation. The most common heterozygous mutation of the
BSML polymorphism of the VDR gene with a reduced BMD occurs in
children of group 1 (43.48%) and group 3 (41.11%). The lowest percentage
of heterozygous mutations was found in children of group 2 (37.50%).
Conclusion: In contrast to children of groups 1 and 3, the presence of
mutations in the BSML polymorphism of the VDR gene is not the
principal reason for a decreased BMD in the children of a school age in
the period of an intensive growth spurt. Decreased BMD is mainly caused
by a delayed bone mass accumulation against the background of an
intensive linear skeletal growth.
P737
VARIABILITY OF SARCOPENIA CUTOFF VALUES AMONG
WOMEN: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
N. Rathnayake1, S. Lekamwasam2, T. Abeygunasekara1, G. Liyanage2,
S. Subasinghe1
1Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, University of Ruhuna, 2Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka
Objective: EWGSOP recommend country and gender specific cutoff
values (2 SD below the mean of specific measure) derived from young
healthy population to identify the sarcopenia. This systematic review was
focused to identify the variability in sarcopenic cutoff values derived
according to EWGSOP guidelines.
Methods: A systematic search was done following the PRISMA
Statement in PubMed using the terms “Sarcopenia”, “Cutoff values” or
“Cutoff thresholds” and “Women” or “Females” and “EWGSOP”.
Original studies which were published up to April 2021 in English
language were reviewed with the agreement of authors. Studies observed
main three measures of sarcopenia; muscle mass as Relative
S353
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Appendicular Skeletal Muscle Mass (RSMI), muscle strength as Hand
Grip Strength (HGS) and physical performance as Gait Speed (GS) were
included. Review articles, meta-analyses and case-reports were excluded.
Results: Search strategy returned 37 studies published from year 2013.
Of them only eight met all inclusion criteria. Only three studies identified
cutoff values for all three measures while other studies investigated either
one or two measures. Two studies determined the cutoff values for RSMI
using DXA while five studies used BIA. Five studies found the HGS
cutoff values and GS cutoff values were identified only in three studies.
DXA measured RSMI cutoff values were 3.69 kg/m2 and 5.03 kg/m2 in
Singapore and Sri Lanka respectively. BIA measured RSMI cutoff values
ranged from 5.51-8.89 kg/m2 in Turkey, Philippine and Poland. BIA
measured RSMI cutoff values were greater compared to those measured
with DXA. HGS cutoff values ranged from 9.66-16.8 kg in Philippine,
South Korea, Sri Lanka, Turkey and Singapore while GS cutoff values
ranged from 0.65-0.96 m/s in Philippine, Sri Lanka and Singapore.
Conclusion: A wide intercountry and intracountry variation of
sarcopenia cutoff values in women was observed. The differences in the
cutoff values depend on the body composition and height of the relevant
subjects in the area in accordance with their genetics and socioeconomic
background even the subjects belong to a same country or a region.
P738
EFFECTS OF ROMOSOZUMAB ON BONE MINERAL
DENSITY IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH
OSTEOPOROSIS: A META-ANALYTIC SYNTHESIS OF
RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS
M. Azharuddin1, M. Sharma2
1Dept. of Pharmaceutical Medicine, Pharmacology, School of
Pharmaceutical Education & Research, 2Dept. of Pharmacology, School
of Pharmaceutical Education & Research, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi,
India
Objective: Worldwide, osteoporosis in postmenopausal women remains
a substantial public health burden. In postmenopausal women, normal
bone turnover cycles are impaired, resulting in reduced BMD and
increased risk of vertebral and non-vertebral fracture. Romosozumab
has been indicated to be effective treatment and associated with increased
BMD in postmenopausal women. However, the evidence of efficacy and
safety of this new drug is not well documented. Therefore, we estimated
the effect of romosozumab on changes in BMD and incidence of new
adverse events using a meta-analytic approach.
Methods: A systematic search on PubMed/MEDLINE, Cochrane Library,
Web of Science, and Clinical trial.gov was performed from the inception to
April 2021. The outcome measures were changes in lumbar spine, total hip
and femoral neck BMD, incidence of adverse events, and fractures. A
random-effects model was used to calculate the weighted mean difference
(WMD) and relative risks (RR) with a 95% confidence interval (CI).
Results: A total of 10 RCTs were included in this metanalytic synthesis.
Results from meta-analysis showed that BMD was significantly increased
at the lumbar spine (WMD=12.61, 95%CI 8.52-16.70, p<0.00001), total
hip (WMD=3.71, 95%CI 2.42-5.01, p<0.00001) and femoral neck
(WMD=3.21, 95%CI 1.75-4.68, p<0.00001). There was also significant
difference in increasing BMD at lumbar spine (WMD=6.19, 95%CI 4.23-
8.14, p<0.00001), total hip (WMD=3.15, 95%CI 2.66-3.64, p<0.00001)
and femoral neck (WMD=3.08, 95%CI 2.59-3.57, p<0.00001) in patients
with romosozumab compared to other therapies (teriparatide/
alendronate). Romosozumab significantly lowers the risk of new
vertebral and non-vertebral fracture compared with control group.
Additionally, there was no significant difference in the incidence of
overall adverse events in patients with romosozumab compared to
placebo and other active treatment (RR 1.00, 95%CI 0.98-1.02, p<0.94)
and (RR 0.98, 95%CI 0.89-1.07, p<0.64).
Conclusion: The current evidence suggests, romosozumab showed
higher gains in BMD, and significantly lower the risk of fracture in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Further, RCTs are required
to confirm the present findings.
P739
QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF TRADITIONAL AND
CONVENTIONAL MEDICINE CLINICAL PRACTICE
GUIDELINES FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
J. H. Kim1, B. K. Seo2, Y. C. Park2 , B. H. Goo1 , S. S. Nam2 , Y. H. Baek2
1Department of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Kyung Hee University
Hospital at Gangdong, Seoul, South Corea, 2Department of Acupuncture
& Moxibustion Medicine, College of Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, South Corea
Objective: The aim of this study was to systematically assess the quality,
methodology, and consistency of recently developed traditional and
conventional medicine CPGs that focus on the management of
osteoporosis and provide helpful recommendations for patients with
osteoporosis.
Material and Methods: From June 2020 to July 2020, CPGs with
osteoporosis targeting any age were systematically retrieved. All CPGs
of traditional and conventional medicine related to the assessment and
diagnosis, management, and clinical therapeutic and pharmacological
recommendations with osteoporosis were eligible for inclusion in this
study. The excluded documents included guidelines without
recommendations, secondary publications derived from CPGs, consensus
statements or consensus conferences based on the opinion of panelists,
systematic reviews, editorials, clinical trials, and single- author
documents. The quality of CPGs was independently examined by three
assessors using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
II (AGREE II) instrument. AGREE II consists of six domains; scope and
purpose, stakeholder involvement, rigor of development, clarity of
presentation, applicability and editorial independence. Consequently,
selected CPGs were graded as recommended (A), recommended with
modifications(B), or not recommended (C), and the specific treatments
and preventive recommendations in the CPGs were summarized.
Results: The quality of the 15 CPGs assessed varied across the AGREE II
domains. The overall quality ranged from 3.0-6.0 out of 7. The domain
that had the highest scores were ‘ clarity of presentation’, with a mean
value of 69.0 % (range 46-83 %); ‘ editorial independence’ had the lowest
score of 30.2% (range 0- 75%). The conventional CPGs focused on
pharmacological treatments, calcium and vitamin D intake, and
prevention, while the traditional CPGs consistently emphasized on herbal
medicine and non-pharmaceutical treatment and management.
Conclusions: Further development of clinical practice guidelines will
require improvement in domains where low i tem scores have been
obtained in the quality assessment in this present study. Further research
is needed on alternative modalities for osteoporosis, especially
complementary approaches, and higher quality clinical practice
guidelines are needed to facilitate evidence-based clinical practice.
Acknowledgement This research was supported by a grant of the Korea
Health Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health Industry
Development Institute(KHIDI). (Grant number : HF20C0013)
P740
СOMBINATION OF SCLERODERMA WITH COVID-19
O. Vorobeva1, A. Lastochkin1, E. Guryanova1
1Chuvash State University I.N. Ulianov, Cheboksary, Russia
Objective: Systemic scleroderma is difficult against the background of
COVID-19. Since systemic scleroderma is a severe autoimmune disease
associated with ischemic disorders due to obliterating microangiopathy,
the development of fibrosis of the epidermis and internal organs (lungs,
heart, digestive tract, kidneys), this leads to hemodynamic disorders. The
aim of the study is to describe the pathological material obtained as a
S354
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
result of the death of a 53-year-old patient, a woman, from COVID-19
pneumonia associated with systemic scleroderma.
Methods: The resulting slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
Results: A sectional study reveals signs of bilateral total pneumonia, with
damage to both lungs. Histological examination revealed signs of
massive death of type 1 alveolocytes and damage to the capillary
endothelium (these signs contribute to the exudation of fluid and protein
components into the intra-alveolar space, this leads to an increase in
pulmonary edema). In the course of the alveolar passages, alveolar sacs,
alveoli, hyaline membranes are formed, an accumulation of serous-
hemorrhagic exudate, polymorphonuclear leukocytes is revealed in the
alveoli, which are located along the interalveolar septa, in which
rheological disorders in the form of erythrocytic sludges are determined
(one). The signs of scleroderma with indurative skin changes were
revealed. Histological examination: the dermis is sclerosed, atrophy of
the skin appendages is revealed. In the vascular endothelium, there is a
proliferation of smooth muscle cells, mucoid swelling of the intima, in
some areas with fibrinoid necrosis, narrowing of the lumen of blood
vessels, microthrombi. The heart showed signs of scleroderma lesions
of the endo- and myocardium. Histological examination reveals
interstitial edema, muscle fibers are unevenly fragmented,
cardiomyocytes are hypertrophied in places, some of them with
dystrophic changes; there is a diffuse fine-mesh proliferation of
connective tissue. In places, there are foci of cardiomyocyte necrosis,
marginal sclerosis and shortening of the chordae of the mitral valve with
the development of its prolapse. In the brain and lungs, edema occurs with
the accumulation of edematous fluid pericellular and perivascular.
Conclusion: It is likely that systemic scleroderma led to an aggravation of
the course of viral pneumonia due to hemodynamic disturbances against
the background of diffuse fibrosis in organs with the development of
respiratory failure.
P741
MACRO-MICROSCOPIC APPEARANCE OF THE ADRENAL
GLANDS AFTER IMPLANTATION OF HYDROXIAPATITE
INTO THE TIBIA AND LOCAL INJECTIONS OF
MESENCHYMAL STEM CELLS ON THE 10TH DAY AFTER
INTERVENTION
I. Solov'Yova1, V. Luzin1, S. Oberemok1, A. Samokish1
1State Establishment of Lugansk People’s Republic Saint Luka Lugansk
State Medical University, Lugansk, Ukraine
Objective: To investigate macro-microscopic appearance of the adrenal
glands in rats after implantation of hydroxyapatite into the tibia and
administration of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) on the 10th day after
intervention
Methods:120male ratswithbody weight of 190-225 gwere used. Animals
were distributed into five groups. Group 1 consisted of the intact controls.
Group 2 consisted of the animals with tibia fracture modeled as 2 mm round
opening in the tibia. In animals of the group 3 the same 2 mm opening was
filled with hydroxylapatite material OK-015. Animals of the groups 4 and 5
underwent the same interventions as the animals of two previous groups but
also received injections of MSC (5E6 cells per injection) into intervention
area. MSC were obtained from donor animals. Phenotyping of the MSC
was performed by means of indirect fluorescent immunoassay. Observation
terms were 15, 30. 60, and 90 d after fracture modeling. Sections of the
adrenal glands were HE stained and photographed using light microscope.
Data analysis included variation statistics.
Results: In animals of the group 2 in the period from the 7th to the 90th
day cross-section area of the adrenal gland increased due to increase of
the cortex (observed mostly from the 7th to the 90th day). In the group 3
cross-section area with both cortex and medulla increased on the 7th day
(in comparison with the group 2) and then decreased in the period from
the 30th to the 90th day. In the group 4 total section area and cortical area
narrowed in comparison with the group 2 decreased in the period from the
15th to the 60th day by 12.44%, 11.71%, and 5.86%, and by 13.67%,
13.18%, and 5.83% respectively. In that group 5 total area decreased in
comparison with the group 3 in the period from the 15th to the 60th day by
5,23%, 7.52%, and 4.08% respectively. Cortical area also narrowed by
4,99%, 9.15%, and 5.03%. Also by the 15th day, medullary area
decreased by 6.97%
Conclusion: Injections of the MSC into intervention area reduces
hypertrophic reaction of the adrenal gland to surgical intervention in the
tibia.
P742
SHOULD WOMEN BE TRAINED IN OSTEOPOROSIS
PREVENTION?
S. Lezhenina1, E. Guryanova1, A. Lammert2, N. Arkhipova1, A.
Vasilieva1, M. Bondarchuk1, E. Ivanov1, D. Guryanov1
1Chuvash State University I.N. Ulianov, Cheboksary, Russia, 2St.
Elizabeth University of Health and Social Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia
Objective: Lifestyle plays an important role in human health. It is
possible to reduce the prevalence of functionally significant injuries and
their associated health consequences by reducing the prevalence of
osteoporosis in women. One way to accomplish this is through health
education and health promotion programs. This study aimed to identify
the educational requirements to help women prevent osteoporosis, based
on the presence of modifiable risk factors for the disease in the age groups
(16-30 years old; 31-64 years old; 65-75 years old).
Methods: The survey was conducted among 567 women in the city of
Cheboksary (Chuvash Republic, Russia). The CINDI (Countrywide
Integrated Noncommunicable Diseases Intervention) Health Monitor
questionnaire was used. Women were divided by age into 3 groups: group
1 (16-30 years old), group 2 (31-64 years old) and group 3 (65-75 years
old). In all three age groups, the prevalence of modifiable risk factors for
osteoporosis (tobacco smoking, unhealthy diet, excessive alcohol
consumption, low physical activity, extreme values for BMI) and the
influence of these factors on the patients’ assessment of their own health
were monitored. The results were compared between groups of
respondents. ANOVA Statistical Analysis - Version 2021.2 and Fisher's
exact test was used for statistical evaluation.
Results: Significant differences were found in the frequency of tobacco
smoking - group 1 smoked the most (16-30 years old; p<0.05);
inappropriate eating habits were most pronounced in group 1 (16-30 years
old; ANOVA statistical analysis test <0.05); excessive alcohol
consumption was highest in group 1 (16-30 years old; p<0.05);
insufficient physical activity was significant and increased with age
(p<0.05). Smoking affected the patients’ own health assessment only in
group 1 (16-30 years old; p<0.05), inappropriate eating habits in group 2
(31-64 years old; p<0.05), excessive alcohol consumption did not affect
any of the groups of respondents own health assessments (p>0.05).
Physical activity affected all groups’ own health assessment (16-30 years
old, 31-64 years old, 65-75 years old; p<0.05), the extreme BMI values
affected only group 3’s (65-75 years old; p<0.05) and group 2’s (31-64
years old; p<0.05) own health assessments.
Conclusion: The study found that risk factors for osteoporosis are most
common in the group of young women who have low levels of health
education regarding prevention of osteoporosis. Timely information and
elimination of modifiable risk factors will help to delay the onset of the
disease and prevent the occurrence of complications.
P743
THE EFFECTS OF IMPLANTATION OF CERAMIC
HYDROXYAPATITE INTO THE TIBIA ON GROSS
MORPHOLOGY OF THE SPLEEN
V. Bibik1, V. Luzin1, E. Statsenko1, N. Zabolotnaya1
S355
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1State Establishment of Lugansk People’s Republic Saint Luka Lugansk
State Medical University, Lugansk, Ukraine
Objective: To investigate dynamic changes of gross morphology of the
spleen after implantation of ceramic hydroxyapatite material into a defect
in the tibia.
Methods: In the experiment we used 90 male rats with body weight of
190-225 g. Animals were separated into three groups. Group 1 comprised
intact animals, group 2 comprised animals with 2 mm opening in the
proximal parts of both tibiae, and group 3 comprised animals with
openings in tibiae filled with hydroxyapatite material OK-015. On the
7th, the 15th, the 30th, the 60th, and the 90th day after intervention, the
animals were decapitated and the spleen were collected for further gross
measurements with 0.05 mm precision. ANOVA and other tests were
performed with the use of standard software.
Results: After defect formation relative weight of the spleen in the period
from the 7th to the 90th day was greater than that of the controls by 8.88%,
8.53%, 11.65%, and 6.71% respectively. Volume values of the spleen
exceeded those of the controls for the period from the 7th to the 90th day
by 10.25%, 18.33%, 16.29%, 9.84%, and 7.07%. After OK-015
implantation, relative weight of the spleen increased in comparison with
the values of the group 2 on the 7th and the 15th day by 5.87% and 6.12%
and volume values in the same period – 10.20% and 11.89%. On the 30th
and the 90th days relative weight of the spleen in the group 3 decreased by
6.41% and 7.96%. Also, volume of the spleen decreased in comparison
with the values of the group 2 in the period from the 30th to the 90th day by
9.53%, 8.93%, and 8.02%.
Conclusion: Formation of a defect in the tibia results in compensatory
hypertrophy of the spleen in the period from the 7th up to the 90th day after
intervention. Implantation of OK-015 into both tibiae results in
manifestations of alterations of the spleen in the beginning of the
experiment (the 7th and the 15th days) with further faster restoration in
later terms - beginning from the 30th day.
P744
IDENTIFYING THE CURRENT TRENDS IN OSTEOPOROSIS
RESEARCH: A REVIEW OF HIGHLY CITED PAPERS
PUBLISHED IN 2016-2020
M. J. Mansourzadeh1, H. Moheimani2, N. Panahi2, M. Sanjari2, K.
Khalaji2, A. Soltani1, N. Fahimfar2, B. Larijani3, A. Ostovar2
1Evidence Based Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, 2Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, 3Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: To compile a list of the recent highly-cited papers on
osteoporosis across the Web of Science, determine their characteristics
and identify the current research trends in the field.
Methods: We searched the Web of Science Clarivate Analytics database
on February 18th, 2021. The search strategy included osteoporosis and
associated keywords to identify all related papers published in 2016-
2020. The highly cited papers were imported to an EndNote library and
assessed by two independent investigators who further removed
irrelevant articles based on titles and abstracts. The remaining papers were
classified by document type, author, journal, affiliated institutions, and
funding bodies. VOSviewer software was used for network visualization.
Results: Our search retrieved 160 highly cited papers. Reviewers
removed 66 irrelevant articles. The remaining 94 papers had received
12748 total citations (135.6 citations per paper). Most were secondary
studies (44.7%, including review articles, meta-analyses, and guidelines),
followed by primary preclinical/animal (31.9%) and clinical/
epidemiological studies (23.4%). All papers excluding guidelines and
preclinical studies were further classified based on their subject category:
Osteoporosis/fracture risk factors (10.6% of total), interventions (26.6%),
and epidemiology/burden (8.5%). Figure1 shows the keyword co-
occurrence network, associated with the highly cited papers.
Respectively, the total number (most frequent contributor) of associated
journals, countries, and institutions were 55 (eight papers from
Osteoporosis International), 37 (52 from the USA), and 426 (13 from
the University of California System, 12 from the University of
Sheffield). The papers were authored by a total of 787 independent
investigators (an average of 10.4 authors per paper). “Cooper C” with
seven and “Harvey NC”, “Kanis JA”, and “Lorentzon M” with six papers
were the most prolific contributors. US governmental institutions and
pharmaceutical companies were the most frequent funders.
Conclusion: Most highly cited papers in the field of osteoporosis
published in 2016-2020 are secondary studies, carried out by the US
institutions with Grants from the US government and pharmaceutical
corporations. Excluding guidelines and preclinical studies, the hottest
investigative topics were comparative intervention and risk factor
assessments. The current research trends in osteoporosis highlighted in
this study can guide the direction of future studies.
Figure 1. Keyword co-occurrence network, associated with the highly-
cited papers in the field of osteoporosis (2016–2020).
P745
TRANSITION RATE TO OSTEOPOROSIS AND FRAGILITY
FRACTURES AT THE SPINE OR HIPS IN ELDERLY
NONOSTEOPOROTIC ASIAN USING FRAX TOOL
Y.-C. Lu1, W.-C. Huang1, Y. C. Lin2, W. P. Chan1
1Dept. of Radiology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University,
2Dept. of Family Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan
Objective: The development of FRAX® has been validated and is used to
estimate the risk of osteoporotic fractures worldwide. However, only a few
studies determine the transition rate from normal BMD or low bone mass to
osteoporotic fractures by FRAX. This study aims to evaluate the rate of
transition to osteoporosis and fragility spine or hip fractures in elderly
nonosteoporotic Asians on various 10-year probabilities of fracture.
Methods: We reviewed DXA medical records from one institution in
Taipei, Taiwan between January 2010 and December 2020. We excluded
those patients who had osteoporosis or vertebral compression fractures or
hip fractures at the first time from the DXA records or of treatment for
osteoporosis. Finally, we recruited 1639 consecutive patients (1218
postmenopausal women and 421 men; age 50 years or older) who
underwent repeated BMD testing and mean follow-up duration of 3.2
±2.0 ys. We used FRAX tool to assess the 10-y probability of a major
osteoporotic fracture (MOF) and stratified participants into four groups:
S356
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Level 1 (MOF, <10%), Level 2 (10-15%), Level 3 (15-20%), and Level 4
(20% and higher). Outcome measures were estimated by any newly
developed vertebral or hip fractures in follow-up exams.
Results: There were 197 participants (12.0%) having vertebral or hip
fractures at the follow-up study. No significant differences were observed
between women (12.7%) and men (10.0%) (p=0.140). The transition rates
to osteoporosis by MOF of levels 1-4 were significantly different in both
sexes (p<0.001). The transition rates to osteoporosis of level 1, 2, 3, and 4
were 19.0%, 31.5%, 47.2%, and 55.9% for women, respectively, and
14.4%, 31.1%, 46.2%, and 100.0% for men, respectively; whereas there
were 4.2%, 12.2%, 14.7%, and 21.7% women, respectively, and 5.4%,
29.5%, 19.2%, and 100% men, respectively, having fractures in follow-up
scans. There was no significant difference of incident fragility fractures
between women and men in all groups, except for the Level 2 (p=0.001).
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that 31% or higher of both sexes
will develop osteoporosis, and over 15-% women and 27-% men will
develop osteoporotic fractures using 10-y FRAX risk of MOF of 10%
or higher in approximately 3 y, even though they are not osteoporotic at
baseline DXA exam.
P746
PREVALENCE OF PROBABLE SARCOPENIA IN
COMMUNITY-DWELLING OLDER GREEK PEOPLE: A
CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY
M. Tsekoura1, E. Billis1, K. Fousekis1, C. Matzaroglou1, E. Tsepis1, J.
Gliatis2
1Dept. of Physiotherapy, School of Health Rehabilitation Sciences,
University of Patras, Aigio, 2Dept. of Medicine, School of Health
Sciences, University of Patras, Patras, Greece
Objective: To assess the prevalence rate of probable sarcopenia and to
determine the factors associated with it in Greek older people.
Methods: A total of 402 Greek community-dwelling individuals
participated in this cross-sectional study. Recruitment was targeted
towards people 60 y and over, living independently at their own
home. Probable sarcopenia was estimated based on cut-off values for
hand grip strength as recommended by the EWGSOP2 (hand grip
strength <27 kg in men or <16 kg in women). Reported determinants
(age, height, weight, sociodemographic characteristics, chronic diseases,
fear of falls and life style of the participants) were obtained through a
questionnaire survey. The assessors were trained and experienced
physiotherapists in all testing procedures. Grip strength was assessed in
the seated position using a SAEHAN dynamometer. Calf circumference
was assessed with inelastic tape. A logistic regression analysis was
performed in order to determine associated risk factors.
Results: The sample comprised 402 participants (292 women, 110 men),
with a mean age of 71.51±7.63 y. Overall, 25.4% of the elderly
participants were identified with probable sarcopenia: 36.4% in men
and 21.2% in women. The findings of this study demonstrated that
probable sarcopenia was positively associated with age, gender, BMI,
skeletal muscle mass index, calf circumference and comorbidities.
Conclusion: There was a 25.4% prevalence of probable sarcopenia in
Greek elderly living in Western Greece. Results, highlights the
importance of detection of hand grip strength and probable sarcopenia
in older people in order to develop effective strategies of prevention and
intervention of sarcopenia.
P747
HIP STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND INCIDENT FRACTURE
OVER 20 YEARS OF FOLLOW UP: A TIME-UPDATING
SURVIVAL ANALYSIS
K. B. Anderson1, M. Mohebbi1, M. C. Tembo1, P. G. Rufus1, N. K.
Hyde1, J. A. Pasco1, M. A. Kotowicz1, K. L. Holloway-Kew1
1Deakin University, IMPACT, Geelong, Australia
Objective: Hip structural analysis (HSA) uses DXA scans of the hip to
calculate geometric variables of the narrow neck (NN), intertrochanter
(IT) and shaft (S) which have the potential to complement BMD for
assessment of fracture risk. This study aimed to determine whether
HSA parameters were associated with risk for incident low trauma
fracture.
Methods: Participants were women (n=1412, age 20-94 y) from the
Geelong Osteoporosis Study. HSA was calculated using dedicated
software from Lunar DPX-L hip scans. Low trauma incident fractures
were self-reported and radiologically confirmed. Participants were
followed from first DXA hip scan with HSA calculation to first fracture,
death, or end of the study period (31/12/2016) for 21996.7 person years
follow up. Time-updating Cox-proportional hazards modelling was used
to investigate associations between HSA parameters and incident
fracture.
Results: Incident fractures were reported for 348 participants. Adjusting
for age, BMI, prior fracture, alcohol consumption, mobility and steroid
use, NN BMD, cross-sectional area, cross-sectional moment of inertia,
section modulus and cortical thickness were negatively associated with
fracture. IT BMD, cross-sectional area, cross-sectional moment of inertia
and section modulus were also negatively associated with fracture.
Negative associations were seen at S BMD, cross-sectional area, section
modulus and cortical thickness. Endocortical diameter of S was positively
associated with fracture and buckling ratio at all three sites was similarly
associated. After further adjustment for femoral neck BMD, the
associations between fracture and buckling ratio at the IT (HR 1.04,
95%CI 1.00-1.08) and S (HR 1.15, 95%CI 1.01-1.30) were sustained.
Conclusion: A greater buckling ratio at the intertrochanter and shaft is
associated with an increased risk for fracture, independent of femoral
neck BMD, and may be useful for improving fracture risk prediction
based on BMD alone.
P748
FUNCTIONAL FINDINGS IN PATIENTS WITH KNEE
OSTEOARTHRITIS IN RELATION TO THEIR CURRENT/
FORMER PROFESSION
M. Mašić1, M. Kovačević1, D. Vukliš1, R. Krasnik2, A. Mikov2, J.
Zvekić-Svorcan3, N. Milenović3
1University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Medicine, 2University of Novi Sad,
Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Child and Youth Health Care of
Vojvodina, 3University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Medicine, Special
Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Novi Sad, Serbia
Objective: Osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee is the most common
osteoarthritis type and the factors influencing the functional status of
the affected individuals are numerous. The aim of this study was to assess
the functional status of patients with knee OA according to the work they
perform or have previously performed.
Methods: This prospective cross-sectional study involved 30 patients of
both sexes, aged ≥55 y, who were referred to the Special Hospital for
Rheumatic Diseases Novi Sad, Serbia due to knee OA. All subjects had a
radiographic finding of the knee that corresponded to the Kellgren-
Lawrence score of 2 or 3 as well as a disease activity score of ≥3
determined on a visual analog scale (VAS), which was also used to assess
their subjective pain level. All patients also completed the Lequesne
functional index for knee osteoarthritis, which was analyzed according
to the type of work patients currently or previously performed. Prior to
commencing the study, consent of the Hospital Ethics Committee was
obtained and all participants signed an informed consent. Statistical
analysis was performed using the software package SPSS ver. 24.
Results: The study sample comprised of 30 individuals (27 women and 3
men) with an average age of 68.73±5.80 y. Majority (44.8%) of the
participants currently or previously worked in professions that involved
prolonged standing and hard physical work, while for 31% and 24% work
activities mostly required standing still, and squatting and kneeling,
S357
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
respectively. The average VAS score for pain was 6.83±2.00, and the
VAS global assessment of the disease score was 7.40±1.54, with the
mean Lequesne index value of 12.30±3.24. The Lequesne index value
was statistically significantly different in subjects performing different
tasks (F=6.51, p<0.01). The highest value was recorded in relation to
professions that involved prolonged standing with hard physical work
(14.27±2.44), followed by standing still (11.2±3.15), while the lowest
average value of this index was associated with professions that mostly
relied on squatting or kneeling (9.86±2.94).
Conclusion: Type of work significantly affects the functional findings in
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee, especially if it is harder physical
work that places significant load on knees.
P749
RELEVANCE OF DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF
OSTEOPOROSIS FOR PHYSICAL AND REHABILITATION
MEDICINE PHYSICIANS
A. Marchenkova1
1National Medical Research Center of Rehabilitation and Balneology” of
Ministry of Health of Russian Federation/ Dept. of Somatic
Rehabilitation, Moscow, Russia
Objectives: There is a high prevalence of osteoporosis (OP) among
patients of the older age undergoing rehabilitation. Therefore, it is
obvious that physical and rehabilitation medicine physicians should be
well oriented in this medical problem. This study aimed to study the
relevance of the problem of osteoporosis (OP) for physical and
rehabilitation medicine physicians, their awareness of the main methods
of diagnosis, treatment and prevention of this disease, as well as the
frequency of their use in daily clinical activity.
Methods: A cross-type study was carried out using a questionnaire
survey. The study included 157 doctors (M-34, F-123) of 8 medical
specialties working in 27 specialized medical institutions on the profile
of "medical rehabilitation. The questionnaire for doctors consisted of 21
items of special questions.
Results: 90.45% of the surveyed doctors believed that the problem of OP
is relevant for their clinical activities, 100% of the respondents indicated
that the presence of OP significantly affects the rehabilitation prognosis
and 95.54% on the degree of effectiveness of medical rehabilitation.
According to the respondents, patients with OP make up on average
30.0% [20.0; 50.0] (0-90) of the total flow of patients. 92.36% (145/
157) of doctors indicated that they know the risk factors for OP,
98.73% (155/157) - methods for diagnosing OP, 68.79% (108/157) -
methods for treating OP, 80.25% (126/157) - methods of preventing
OP, 47.13% (74/157) - what is FRAX. However, 35.01% (55/157) of
the respondents considered their level of awareness of the problem
sufficient for managing patients with OP. Diagnostic procedures for OP
are recommended by the all endocrinologists (100%) and the majority of
traumatologists (72.73%), gynecologists (66.67) and cardiologists
(64.28%), as well as on average half (50%) neurologists and therapists.
Endocrinologists (100%), gynecologists (66.67%) and therapists (60%)
are mainly involved in the treatment of OP. 32.48% (51/157) of
physicians have ever referred their patients to a BMD assessment.
Conclusion: The problem of OP is relevant for the clinical activities of
physical and rehabilitation medicine physicians and there is the need for
advanced training on the problem of OP among these specialists.
P750
THE EFFECT OF CALCIUM AND VITAMIN D3 ON CALCIUM
HOMEOSTASIS AND FALLS INCIDENCE IN PATIENTS WITH
HIGH FRACTURE RISK UNDERGOING MEDICAL
REHABILITATION
L. Marchenkova1, V. Vasileva1
1National Medical Research Center of Rehabilitation and Balneology” of
Ministry of Health of Russian Federation, Dept. of Somatic
Rehabilitation, Moscow, Russia
Objective: Vitamin D and calcium deficiencies is of particular importance
in older patients undergoing medical rehabilitation and having a high risk
of fractures. Preventing falls and fractures, including during the course of
rehabilitation, is an important challenge that can be addressed in these
patients, in particular through improved nutrition and vitamin D and
calcium supplementation. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of
long-term calcium and vitamin D3 intake on calcium homeostasis and
fall's rate in patients with high fracture risk starting rehabilitation course.
Methods: The study enrolled 119 men and women aged 50-80 y.o. with
high absolute fracture probability by FRAX who started medical
rehabilitation. 41 patients have been receiving antiresorptive therapy
already comprised group 1, other patients were randomized into groups
2 (n=39) and 3 (control, n=39). In groups 1 and 2, a food supplement
containing calcium citrate 1000 mg and vitamin D3 600 IU was
prescribed for 12 months. All patients undergo laboratory examination,
food calcium intake and fall assessment at baseline, in 6 and 12 months
Results: Daily calcium intake in the study sample (n=119) was 782.9
±243.4 mg. Vitamin D deficiency was detected in 38.4% of the examined.
An increase in 25(OH)D level was noted in groups 1 and 2 after 6 and 12
months (p<0.01). Patients in group 1 showed an increase in serum
osteocalcin and calcium levels after 6 and 12 months (p<0.05). In group
3, there was an increase of immunoreactive PTH levels after 6 (p<0.05)
and 12 months (p<0.01), C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen level
and alkaline phosphatase activity after 12 months (p<0.05). In group 1,
there was also a decrease in proportion of patients who fell after 6 months
(χ2=4.97, p=0.026) and a decrease in the total number of falls after 12
months (χ2=4.89, p=0.027). Group 2 showed a decrease in the number of
patients who fell after 6 and 12 months (χ2=48.58, p=0.0034 at both
stages of the study) and the number of falls in general after 6 months
(χ2=6.02, p=0.0142).
Conclusion: The obtained data allow us to recommend prescription of
dietary supplements containing calcium and vitamin D3 as a part of
complex rehabilitation of patients with high fracture risk.
P751
THE ROLE OF MACROPHAGE MIGRATION INHIBITORY
FACTOR IN ACTIVITY AND PROGRESSION OF
ANKYLOSING SPONDYLITIS
Y. G. Gazar1, M. H. Hanafy1, M. E. Elrefi2
1Al-Azhar University Hospitals, 2Military Hospitals, Rheumatology,
Cairo, Egypt
Objective: Ankylosing Spondylitis (AS) is a chronic inflammatory form
of arthritis that predominantly affects the axial joints and has a global
prevalence of 1%. Disease progression is marked by osteoproliferation
and bone fusion in the axial joints, causing considerable loss of mobility.
Migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine
implicated in several diseases. Elevated serum MIF levels have been
reported in AS the role of MIF in bone formation has been a subject of
controversy. Aim: Detection of the level of MIF in AS patients and
correlate the level with disease activity and progression.Methods: This
cross-sectional case-control study was concluded on 70 randomly
selected people from the internal medicine department in Kobry El-
Kobba Military Hospital and from the rheumatology and rehabilitation
department in El-Hussein university hospital. The population study was
divided into two groups: Group A: (50) Patients with AS who met the
European Spondyloarthropathy Study Group (ESSG) criteria for AS (30)
and Group B: (20) Healthy controls. Serum MIF by ELISA was
measured. X-rays cervical &lumbosacral vertebrae (dorsal, lateral) views
were obtained. m-SASS scores (based on radiographic findings to detect
progression) were assessed. MSK U/S on Tendo Achillesaffected in AS
S358
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
patients were done.Results: The mean age of all patients was (38.2±8.4)
y. Regarding the gender of the patients, the majority (65.7%) of patients
were males, while (34.3%) were females. (88%) of AS patients had
cervical erosion or sclerosis, (46%) had dorsal erosion or sclerosis,
(92%) hadlumbosacral erosion or sclerosis, with m-SASS score of (11
±6.1). Regarding musculoskeletal U/S, (72%) had evidence of
inflammation and erosion. Highly significant increase in ESR, CRP,
and MIF levels in the A group; compared to the control B group; with a
highly significant statistical difference (p<0.01). the increase in smoking,
ESR, and MIF level; had an independent effect on increasing the
probability of progression occurrence; with a significant statistical
difference (p<0.05 respectively). MIF level at a cutoff point (>51)
predicted patients with progression, with fair accuracy (74%),
sensitivity=53% and specificity=94% (p=0.0056).
Table 1. Radiological data among 50 AS subjects.
Variables
Frequency (%)
X-ray
“vertebrae”
Cervical erosion
or sclerosis
44 (88%)
Dorsal erosion
or sclerosis
23 (46%)
Lumbosacral erosion
or sclerosis
46 (92%)
m-SASS score
11±6.1
U/S
Effusion &
Inflammation (U/S)
36 (72%)
U/S: musculoskeletal ultrasound.
Table 2. Comparison between the 2 groups as regards basic clinical and
drug history data using Mann-Whitney's U and chi-square tests.
Variable
Non-progressor
group
(35)
Progressor
group
(15)
Mann-Whitney's
U test
Median (IQR)
Median
(IQR)
P value
Disease
duration (y)
13 (11.2-17.5)
20 (16.5-23)
=0.0028**
BASDAI score
4 (2-4)
3 (2-4)
=0.9313
Variable
Non-progressor
group
(35)
Progressor
group
(15)
Chi-square test
P value
Smoking
+
ve
10 (28.6%)
10 (66.7%)
=0.012*
HTN
+
ve
6 (17.1%)
3 (20%)
=0.8114
DM
+
ve
6 (17.1%)
2 (13.3%)
=0.7389
NSAIDs
+
ve
18 (51.4%)
9 (60%)
=0.5812
DMARDs
+
ve
30 (85.7%)
14 (93.3%)
=0.4520
TNFi
+
ve
5 (14.3%)
2 (13.3%)
=0.9298
Conclusion: MIF ply an important role in the pathogenesis of AS and has
a link between chronic inflammation, new bone formation, and disease
progression and can be used as an indicator for activity and disease
progression
P752
THE BENEFITS OF COMBINING PHYSICAL THERAPY IN
THE CONSERVATIVE TREATMENT OF MORTON’S
NEURALGIA
V. D. Caimac1, I.-R. Marcu1, A.-M. Bumbea1, C. O. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Appreciation of the effects on pain and gait obtained by
combining the physical therapeutic means in the 14-day conservative
therapeutic program dedicated to patients diagnosed with Morton’s neuritis.
Methods: We organized a prospective, observational, randomized study
for a group of 42 patients with Morton’s neuritis. The patients were
randomly divided into a control group that received only specific
medication and a study group in which the treatment also included
physical therapy (ultrasound, laser, orthosis, massage). Patients were
evaluated at baseline and after 14 d of treatment. The parameters we
followed were: pain (assessed using a visual analogous scale for pain)
and disability (ADL 24 and ability of walking).
Results: Score values for functional parameters have improved: the value
of the VAS score for pain decreased by 45.3% in group 2 compared to
34.1% in group 1 (p=0.000053); ADL score improved (52.5% in group 2
vs. 41.1% in group 1) and locomotor capacity progressed more in patients
in group 2 (43.3%) compared to group 1 (31.4%). The results had
statistical significance (p<0.05).
Conclusion: The results highlight the improvement of pain and of
functional parameters in the study group, which certifies the efficiency
of the physical means of treatment applied within the non-surgical
therapeutic program, to patients with Morton’s neuritis. These findings
motivate the continuation of the study over a longer period of time and a
larger number of patients.
P753
POLYMORPHISM OF THE RS12409277 PRDM16 GENE AND
ITS RELATION WITH ANTHROPOMETRIC AND
DENSITOMETRIC PARAMETERS IN POSTMENOPAUSAL
WOMEN IN EASTERN SLOVAKIA
M. Mydlárová Blaščáková1, K. Hricová2, J. Poráčová3, S. Tomková4, A.
Avuková1, Z. Tomková5
1University of Prešov in Prešov, Faculty of Humanities and Natural
Sciences, Dept. of Biology, Prešov, 2University of Prešov in Prešov,
Faculty of Humanities and Natural Sciences, Dept. of Biology, Hospital
Košice-Šaca a.s., Prešov, Košice-Šaca, 3University of Prešov in Prešov,
Faculty of Humanities and Natural Sciences, Dept. of Biology, Prešov,
4Osteocentre, Hospital Košice-Šaca a.s., Košice-Šaca, 5Osteocentre s.r.o.,
Prešov, Slovakia
Objective: The PRDM16 gene is generally studied in relation to white
and brown adipose tissue. The aim of our work was to determine the
possible association of the polymorphism rs12409277 PRDM16 gene
with selected anthropometric and densitometric parameters in
postmenopausal women in eastern Slovakia.
Methods: The research group consisted of 96 postmenopausal women,
which we divided according to the T-score into: osteoporosis (OP=31),
osteopenia (OPE=50) and control group (CG=15). Genomic DNA was
isolated from peripheral blood using a commercial NucleoSpin® Blood
Macherey-Nagel kit according to a standard protocol. Real-time PCR and
TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assay according to the appropriate protocol
were used for genotypic analysis. Densitometric measurement of
postmenopausal women was conducted with a body densitometer DXA
(DXA Hologic Discovery, Waltham, MA, USA). From anthropometric
parameters, we measured body weight (DM – 117, Dimarson
Elektroniks, Kyiv, Ukraine), body height (DIN 862, KINEX Measuring,
Prague, Czech Republic), waist circumference and hip circumference.
Results: Based on the Chi-square test, we found statistical significance
(p<0.008) in the representation of genotypes and also in the
S359
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
representation of alleles (p<0.003) among the observed groups of
postmenopausal women. In the CT and TT genotype, we found
statistically significant differences in anthropometric parameters: body
weight, BMI, waist and hip circumference, and densitometric parameters:
T-score total left hip (p<0.004), Z-score total left hip (p<0.009), Z-score
neck left hip (p<0.002) and BMD total left hip (p<0.005). Based on
correlation analysis, we found a statistical dependence of BMI and CT
genotype (p<0.013) and BMI and TT genotype (p<0.002) in the
rs12409277 PRDM16 gene polymorphism.
Conclusion: The rs12409277 polymorphism of the PRDM16 gene as
well as the gene itself has been little studied in terms of BMD and the
risk of fractures. Our results provide initial information on the
representation of genotypes and alleles of the rs12409277 PRDM16 gene
polymorphism in the East Slovak population of postmenopausal women.
Acknowledgment: This work was supported the project VEGA no.
1/0461/19.
P754
DIACEREIN POSTMARKETING ASSESSMENT: A
PROSPECTIVE OBSERVATIONAL STUDY ON THE
EFFECTIVENESS AND SAFETY OF DIACEREIN IN A REAL-
LIFE SETTING
I. B. Belyaeva1
1North-West State Medical University I.I. Mechnikov, 25th City Clinic of
Rheumatology, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
Objective: To assess the effectiveness and safety of diacerein when used
according to its marketing authorisation.
Methods: This prospective, open, non-controlled, observational trial in
two Russian centres included patients with symptomatic knee or hip
osteoarthritis (OA) who were about to initiate a treatment with 50 mg
diacerein twice daily. WOMAC and pain on walking using a 100 mm
visual analogue scale (VAS) were evaluated at baseline and three month
visits. Patients assessed their overall well-being using a 0-100 point scale
at baseline, three months and via a telephone survey at five intermediate
timepoints. The rate of responders to treatment according to the
OMERACT-OARSI criteria was calculated at three months. Adverse
events were collected at each timepoint.
Results: In total 61 patients were enrolled, 57 of them completed the
study. The trial population had a mean age of 61±9 y and a BMI of 32
±7 kg/m2; 90% were women. Most of the patients (98%) suffered from
knee OA, 33% had hip OA (Kellgren-Lawrence graded II-III);
concomitant hand OA was present in 38% of the trial population. 95%
of patients had at least one comorbidity, mostly cardiovascular diseases.
A significant reduction in pain on walking was observed under diacerein
treatment (p<0.001) with a mean change from baseline at three months of
‑22.11 mm (95%CI: -25.82, -18.41). WOMAC pain, stiffness and
function subscores were also significantly reduced after three months
(p<0.001). The patient’s assessment of overall wellbeing significantly
increased compared with baseline from Week 4 (p=0.0034); change from
baseline at three months was 17.78 mm (95%CI: -13.68, -21.89;
p<0.001). The OMERACT-OARSI responders’ rate was 61%.
Interestingly, symptoms of concomitant low back pain and hand OA also
improved during the study (p<0.001). The incidence of adverse reactions
was 41%. Among them, the most common were diarrhoea and abdominal
pain (49% and 34%, respectively). No occurrence of gastric/duodenal
ulcer was observed, as well as no change in concomitant cardiovascular
diseases.
Conclusion: Diacerein was shown to be an effective and safe
symptomatic treatment of knee and hip OA in patients with various
comorbidities.
Disclosure: Trial was funded by TRB Chemedica.
P755
INSTRUMENTAL AND BIOCHEMICAL INDICATORS OF THE
STATE OF BONE TISSUE IN OSTEOMALACIA AND
OSTEOPOROSIS
A. Ignatiev1, T. Ermolenko1, N. Turchin1
1Odessa National Medical University, Odessa, Ukraine
Objective: A decrease in BMD, which occurs in osteomalacia (OM) and
osteoporosis (OP), is accompanied by a decrease in the strength properties
of bone structures and an increase in the risk of fractures. Despite the
same clinical outcome (fractures), the morphostructural, etiological, and
pathogenetic characteristics of OP and OM differ qualitatively. The aim
was to study the diagnostic criteria for osteomalacia and osteoporosis in
postmenopausal women.
Methods: We examined 157 postmenopausal (PM) women aged 57.5
±1.2 y, of which 103 women were diagnosed with OP (group I) and 24
morphometrically diagnosed with OM (group II), control group (III) - 30
practically healthy women. X-ray densitometry was performed
(osteodensitometer Hologic Discovery (USA)). The level of 25(OH)D
in the blood serum was determined by the enzyme immunoassay on a
EUROIMMUN analyzer (Germany). Bone resorption marker C-terminal
telopeptide of collagen type 1 (CTx), osteocalcin (OC) and PTH - by
immunochemiluminescent method, phosphorus level - by a
spectrophotometric method using a Cobas 6000 analyzer (Roche
Diagnostics, Switzerland). The level of osteoprotegerin (OPG) was
determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay on an
AxsymSystem apparatus (Abbot, Germany). Statistical processing was
performed using Microsoft Office Excel and Statistica 10.0 software.
Student's t-test was used for mathematical processing. When assessing
the strength of the correlation coefficients, the Chaddock scale was used.
Results: Analysis of the data obtained showed a decrease in BMD
(p˂0.05) in groups I and II. However, BMD neck, T-test neck, Z-test
neck in the group of women with OM were significantly reduced
(p˂0.05), in comparison with the group with OP. The levels of
25(OH)D, OC, OPG were also reduced (p˂0.05) in the second group of
women compared with the first group. We obtained higher (p˂0.05)
indices of PTH and STx in the group of patients with OM in comparison
with the group with OP. Correlation analysis of the obtained results
showed a relationship between the level of 25(OH)D and indicators of
structural and functional changes in CT: 25(OH)D and CTx (r=-0.669;
p=0.001), 25(OH)D, and BMD neck (r=0.736; p=0.002). There was also
a direct relationship between BMD neck and CTx (r=-0.463; p=0.002).
Conclusion: In the PM of women with OM, in comparison with the PM in
women with OP, significantly larger (p˂0.05) changes in the structural and
functional state of CT, biochemical markers of CT resorption and
remodeling, as well as lower (p˂0.05) content level 25(OH)D. The content
level 25(OH)D is highly informative in terms of predicting and diagnosing
a decrease in BMD and the risk of fractures. The biochemical marker of
CTx resorption has a high informative value in terms of predicting, timely
diagnosis, and the effectiveness of the reduction treatment.
P756
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS, TREATMENT AND
REMISSION OF PATIENTS WITH BONE PAGET IN A
TERTIARY HOSPITAL CENTER
J.-P. Baldivieso Achá1, C. Valero-Martínez, F. Gutierrez Rodriguez, I.
González Álvaro1, J.-A. García Vadillo1
1Princess University Hospital, Madrid, Spain
Objective: To evaluate the characteristics, administered treatment and its
response in patients with Paget's disease treated in the last 5 y in our center.
Methods: Retrospective observational study of patients with bone Paget
treated in the last 5 y in the Rheumatology Service of an urban tertiary
hospital assigned to the care of 325,000 inhabitants. The histories of
S360
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
patients with Paget who have attended our consultations at least once
during the last 5 y were reviewed. Demographic data, type of affectation,
established treatments, remission and duration of this were collected.
Total remission was considered when the clinical reason for the indication
remitted with treatment and/or serum alkaline phosphatase levels
normalized. Partial remission was considered when symptoms and/or
alkaline phosphatase were reduced by >50%. The statistical study was
carried out with stata. The quantitative variables analyzed were described
with mean and standard deviation. The categorical variables were
expressed with absolute and relative frequencies. In the univariate
analysis to study the factors related to the response to treatment, the chi-
square and Pearson's test were applied. All tests were considered a
significance level p<0.05.
Results: A total of 105 patients (50.4% men) were seen with a mean age of
81 (DS10.49) years for men and 83 (DS 11.30) y for women. Of these, 29
(27.6%) had not required treatment throughout their disease, presenting a
significantly higher percentage of monostotic involvement (72.5% vs.
27.5%), and a lower initial alkaline phosphatase 99, 5 IU/l [77-124] in
relation to 195 IU [144-229] in patients who received treatment. The
remaining 76 (72.38%) patients had received a total of 73 cycles of i.v
treatment with zoledronate and 37 with oral aminobisphosphonates (oral
BPP). In 91.11% of the zoledronate cycles, total remission and
normalization of serum alkaline phosphatase levels were obtained with a
mean duration of 48 months; and in 72.73% of those treated with oral BPP,
complete remission was also obtained, with a mean duration of 96 months.
During the follow-up period, 4 died in the untreated group and 5 in the
treated group. No malignancy to osteosarcoma was observed. In the last 5
y, only 24 new patients were diagnosed
Conclusion: In our patients with active bone Paget with the iv
administration of zoledronate 4-5 mg, we observed a prolonged total
remission greater than 4 y in 91% of the treated patients. A higher
percentage of patients in relation to those treated with oral bisphosphonates,
but it is striking that the mean duration of this remission is longer.
P757
BONE QUALITY IN ADULT WISTAR RATS OFFSPRING IS
ASSOCIATED WITH PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL
NUTRITIONAL MANIPULATION
E. Armeni1, N. Syggelos1, A. Augoulea1, N. Mili1, S. Paschou1, G.
Kaparos2, H. Vafaei3, I. Dontas4, K. Marinou5, G. Vaggos6, P.
Raptou4, E. Makarios1, K. Nicolaides7, I. Lambrinoudaki1
12nd Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Aretaieio Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Biochemical
Laboratory, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Aretaieio
Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Faghihi
Hospital, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran,
4Laboratory for Research of the Musculoskeletal System, Th.
Garofalidis, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, KAT
Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Greek Ministry of Rural Development and
Food, Dept. of Animal Welfare for Farm and Laboratory Animals,
Athens, Greece, 6Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynecology, General Hospital
of Arta, Arta, Greece, 7Harris Birthright Research Centre for Fetal
Medicine, King's College Hospital, London, UK
Objective: The impact of nutrition on skeletal growth seems to begin in
utero. The very early programming of bone development affects bone
mass accumulation, growth and development from early on. Skeletal
acquisition tends to be more rapid at the latter vs. earlier stage of the
gestational period, while the process starts tapering from the 39th week
of gestation. This study aimed to evaluate the impact of perinatal food
manipulation on skeletal characteristics and insulin levels of Wistar rats at
the age of 1 y.
Methods: 67 first-time pregnant rats were randomized, to receive either
normal diet (control diet, CD), food-restricted (FR), or fat-enhanced diet
(FF), from the 12th gestational day. The rats gave birth on the 21st day of
pregnancy. Pups born to FR-mothers were subsequently divided into:
fetal growth restricted (FGR) and non-FGR, based on their birth weight.
Manipulation of maternal diet continued through the lactation period.
Following delivery, all neonates were cross-fostered until the 25th day
postpartum. Pups born to normally fed mothers were lactated by FR-, FF-
or CD-fed mothers. A similar process was followed for the pups born to
mothers FF- or FR-during pregnancy. All pups were weaned to the diet of
their foster mother, on the 26th day postpartum, and continued to receive
the same diet until one year of age. Bone density was assessed by pQCT.
Results: CD/CD had higher values of total bone density and total/
subcortical area compared to FF/FF rats. The FF/FF group had higher
subcortical density when compared to the FF/FR group. Pups receiving
CD throughout the experiment had higher values of all assessed skeletal
parameters in comparison to pups FGR/CD. Pups food restricted
postnatally had lower values of all assessed skeletal parameters compared
to non-FGR/FF rats. Pups FGR/FF had higher insulin levels compared to
rats FF/FR. Comparable levels of insulin were identified in rats receiving
high fat diet postnatally, irrespective of prenatal food-restriction or high
fat diet.
Conclusion: We observed distinct skeletal acquisition and insulin levels’
profiles in Wistar rats who experienced perinatal food manipulation
before birth and until their first year of life.
P758
IMPROVING COMMUNICATION OF FRACTURE RISK
GLOBALLY: INSIGHTS FROM INTERVIEWS WITH
PATIENTS. THE RISKCOMMUNICATION STUDY OR RICO
STUDY
C. Beaudart1, S. Silverman2, Z. Paskins3, A. Boonen4, J.-F. Kaux5, S.
Fujiwara6, M. Hiligsmann1
1Dept. of Health Services Research, CAPHRI Care and Public Health
Research Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands,
2Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, USA, 3School of Medicine,
Keele University, Staffordshire, UK, 4Dept. of Internal Medicine, Division
of Rheumatology and CAPRHI Care and Public Health Research Institute,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands,
5Physical Medicine, Rehabilitation and Sports Traumatology, University
and University Hospital of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 6Dept. of Pharmacy,
Yasuda Women's University, Hiroshima, Japan
Objective: Lack of or low quality communication between patient and
healthcare provider may partially explain poor initiation and adherence to
anti-osteoporosis treatment. In this study, we aimed to gain insights into
patients’ understanding and preferences for various approaches for
communication of fracture risk, derived from a risk algorithm, with the
goal of improving osteoporosis treatment and management.
Methods: Individual physical or online interviews with patients at risk for
fractures were organized in 4 different countries (Belgium,
The Netherlands, Unites States and Japan). A semi-structured workbook
developed following a scoping literature review and experts insight was
used to conduct interviews. Using an example of a personal risk of 21% for
any fracture in the next 10 y, four main fracture risk presentations were used
to guide these interviews: verbal/written presentation of the percentage
fracture risk, various types of coloured graphs, icon arrays, and icon arrays
with or without treatment effect on fracture risk. Patients were asked to
critically reflect on the different framing presentations for fracture risk, to
suggest alternatives for improvement and to rank their preference.
Results: A total of 26 women (mean age of 70.5 y) at risk for fractures
participated in the study. Thirteen (50%) had an history of fracture, 18
(69.2%) were on antiosteoporosis medication and 4 (15.4)%, 11 (42.3%),
5 (19.2%) considered themselves at low, moderate and high risk of
fracture respectively. Most patients (76.9%) preferred coloured graphs
over other presentations. Icon arrays of baseline fracture risk were never
a preferred method of risk communication. Most patients also reported
S361
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
that presenting the risk of fracture with and without treatment would be
more convincing to initiate a treatment. Participants also suggested that
fracture risk communication should be supported with additional data,
such as the consequences of fractures. Most patients would value the
development of a visual tool to better understand fracture risk.
Conclusion: Insights from these interviews suggest the importance of a
patient-centered approach to fracture risk communication. A larger global
survey is currently being developed to provide additional insights into
patients’ understanding and preferences for fracture risk communication
and assess potential cultural and geographical differences in the optimal
way to communicate fracture risk.
Acknowledgement: Amgen, Inc. funded this investigator initiated study.
*The RICO project is endorsed by the Epi/QOL working group.
P759
OSTEOPOROSIS AND PREVALENT VERTEBRAL
FRACTURES ARE ASSOCIATED WITH INSULIN
RESISTANCE IN NON-DIABETIC POSTMENOPAUSAL
WOMEN
E. Armeni1, A. Augoulea1, S. Paschou1, A. Soureti1, G. Kaparos2, D.
Rizos3, A. Antoniou4, K. Panoulis1, I. Lambrinoudaki1
12nd Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Aretaieio Hospital, 2Biochemical Laboratory,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Aretaieio Hospital,
3Hormonal Laboratory, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, 41st Dept. of Radiology, National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens, Aretaieio Hospital, Athens, Greece
Objective: Diabetes mellitus is a recognized risk factor of osteoporosis
and low bone density, while recent data is suggesting a possible
association between prediabetes and bone fragility. This study aimed to
assess the possible link between the diagnosis of prevalent fractures of the
lumbar spine (LS) and/or a diagnosis of osteoporosis and insulin
resistance in a postmenopausal population.
Methods: A total of 322 postmenopausal consecutive outpatients were
retrieved for this cross-sectional study. We included women without
significant insulin resistance (homeostasis model assessment, HOMA-
IR<5), no clinically overt cardiovascular disease, normal thyroid
function, and no evidence of gynecological malignancy. We obtained
fasting venous blood samples, for biochemical and hormonal assessment.
DXA was used to estimate bone density at the lumbar spine (LS) and
femoral neck (FN). The prevalence of vertebral fractures (VFs) was
estimated using plain LS radiographs.
Results: VFs were prevalent in 7.5% of our women (24/322).
Osteoporosis was evident at the LS in 8.8% of women (19/216), and at
the FN in 14.8% (31/209) of women. Measures of bone density correlated
significantly with age, menopausal age and HOMA-IR values (FN, BMD
r-coefficient=0.143, p-value=0.040; LS, T-score r-coefficient=0.149, p-
value=0.028; FN, T-score r-coefficient=0.147, p-value=0.033. The
presence of LS- or FN-osteoporosis associated with lower values of
HOMA-IR (HOMA-IR values, osteoporosis vs. osteopenia/normal
density at LS, 1.2±0.4 vs. 1.7±0.9, p-value=0.018; at the FN: 1.3±0.6
vs. 1.6±0.9, p-value=0.091) as well as with higher follicular stimulating
hormone (FSH) levels and age. Multivariable logistic regression models
showed that the prevalence of VFs associated with HOMA-IR values (1st
vs. 4th quartile, 2.5% vs. 7.5%, p-value 0.018 after bootstrapping for 1000
samples). A diagnosis of LS-osteoporosis associated with HOMA-IR
values (1st vs. 4th quartile, 13.7% vs. 1.8%, p-value=0.030 after
bootstrapping for 1000 samples) as well as menopausal age. A diagnosis
of FN-osteoporosis associated with HOMA-IR levels (1st vs. 4th quartile,
16.9% vs. 4.5%, p-value=0.040 after bootstrapping for 1000 samples).
All models were adjusted for age, BMI, FSH, and estradiol.
Conclusion: High normal insulin resistance is associated with lower rates
of VFs, LS- and FN-osteoporosis, as estimated by levels of HOMA-IR, in
a nondiabetic postmenopausal population.
P760
THE PATIENTS ON DENOSUMAB FOR TREATMENT OF
OSTEPOROSIS GET SIGNIFICANT IMMUNITY AND
PROTECTION FROM COVID-19
S. B. Bajaj1
1Falls Institute Of India, Nagpur, India
Objective: To explain the importance of giving priority to denosumab
while treating the older adults with osteoporotic fragility fractures as they
are more prone to acquire COVID-19.
Methods: The principal investigator is a Consultant Orthogeriatrician
having special interest in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of
osteoporotic fragility fractures. Since June 2018, he is using denosumab
for avoiding fractures in senior citizens. The final selection is done on the
basis of DXA Scan along other innumerable clinical risk factors considered
in FRAX. Since then his 30 patients are on regular 6 monthly dose of
denosumab. The very first patient was given first dose on 30 June 2018.
She has completed total 5 doses. Those who have completed at least 3 doses
are included in this study. Two patients are lost to follow up and one patient
died due to non-COVID diagnosis. The beneficiaries are between 60-92 y
of age. Except only one male, rest all are females. Results: The results of
this 24 months follow up study are promising, result- oriented, cost-
effective and prudent. Not a single patient suffered from COVID-19 like
symptoms. Not a single patient required hospital admission or oxygen
therapy at home. For very first time and then before giving next dose, every
time CTX (BTM) was done. The beneficiaries are monitored regularly for
calcium, vitamin D and other dietary supplements along-with the rest
mandatory guidelines about exercising, pranayam, yoga, etc.
Conclusion: The clinicians and consultants in the field of osteoporotic
fragility fractures should consider about initiating denosumab on priority
basis to older adults who are otherwise more prone to acquire COVID-19.
P761
THE RELIABILITY OF MEASURING MUSCLE QUANTITY
AND QUALITY WITH EXTENDED-FIELD-OF-VIEW
ULTRASOUND AT NINE BODY SITES
J. van den Broeck1, S. Héréus1, M. De Maeseneer2, A. Scafoglieri1
1Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 2Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium
Objective: Loss of muscle mass is associated with physical disability and
mortality. Ultrasound is a field-based method for the quantification of
muscle quantity and quality. The extended-field-of-view (EFOV), as an
ultrasound technique, makes it possible to measure muscle thickness
(MT), cross-sectional area (CSA) and echogenicity (EG). EFOV seems
to be reliable and valid at, particularly, the lower extremities. For the
scope of regional and whole body composition the reliability of multiple
measuring sites needs to be confirmed. For this reason, we wanted to
assess the intra- and inter-rater reliability of EFOV ultrasound for
measuring muscle quantity and quality at 9 different body sites.
Methods: 25 healthy adults (12 men, 13 women) were included in this
study. The ultrasound measurements were performed using a Mindray M7
(Shenzhen Mindray Bio-Medical Electronics Co., Ltd.) with a linear probe
(10 MHz). The MT, CSA, and EG of the tibialis anterior, gastrocnemius
(caput mediale), rectus femoris, biceps femoris, rectus abdominis, erector
spinae, biceps brachii, triceps brachii, and forearm extensor muscles were
measured. Reliability analysis was performed with ICC (two way random).
ICC values 0-0.20 were considered as poor, 0.21-0.4 slight, 0.41-0.6
moderate, 0.61-0.8 substantial, and ≥0.81 as excellent.
Results: The age of the participants ranged from 19-61 years old. The
intra-rater reliability for the quantification of muscle quantity and quality
was substantial to excellent, with ICCs varying between 0.79-0.98. The
ICC’s for the inter-rater reliability for all variables (MT, CSA, and EG) of
the tibialis anterior, gastrocnemius, rectus abdominis, biceps brachii, and
forearm extensor muscles ranged from 0.61-0.87. For the rectus femoris,
S362
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
biceps femoris, erector spinae, and triceps brachii muscles, the ICC’s
ranged from 0.47-0.85.
Conclusion: The quantity and quality of tibialis anterior, biceps brachii,
gastrocnemius (caput mediale), and rectus abdominis muscles can be
reliably measured with EFOV ultrasound. The quantity of rectus femoris
and forearm extensor muscles and the quality of biceps femoris and
erector spinae muscles can also be measured reliably. The triceps brachii
seems to be unreliable for ultrasound measurement.
P762
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
PATIENTS IN TIMES OF PANDEMIC COVID-19
M. E. Erraoui1, I. G. Ghozlani2
1Rheumatology Dept., Hassan II Hospital, University Hospital, Faculty
of Medicine, Ibn Zohr University, 2Rheumatology Dept., 1st FAR
Medical Surgical Center, University Hospital, Ibn Zohr University,
Agadir, Morocco
Objective: Knee osteoarthritis is a source of pain and functional
disability. However, maintaining regular physical activity greatly
contributes to the preservation of muscle strength, in particular the
quadriceps, thus cushioning the loads on a knee. In times of COVID-
19, this activity was abandoned following confinement dictated by the
state of health emergency, which can affect the scalability of the
degenerative process of the knee. This study aimed to evaluate physical
activity in knee OA patients in COVID-19 time.
Methods: Cross-sectional study conducted with adult patients aged 15-
69 followed for knee osteoarthritis selected according to the ACR or
Kellgren-Lawrence criteria, seen in rheumatology consultation. The
exclusion criteria were patients aged <15 y and >69 y. 50 patients
participated in the study. The pain assessment was evaluated by the
VAS. The assessment of knee osteoarthritis by WOMAC and physical
activity by IPAQ short version.
Results: In the 50 patients included, the mean age was 54±6 y, with a
predominance of women 88% (44). The mean BMI was 31±4. In our
sample, 18% (9) of patients had hypertension and 6% (3) had diabetes.
The involvement is bilateral in 72% (36) of cases, left unilateral in 18% (9)
and right unilateral in 10% (5). The x-ray of the knees under load showed in
28% (14) a left knee osteoarthritis stage III and in 28% (14) a right knee
osteoarthritis stage II. There was no difference between the pain VAS
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic with a mean of eight. The
mean WOMAC score was 49±13. The median total activity score of the
IPAQ was 1975 metabolic task equivalent (MET) -min/week and the time
spent sitting was 325 min/d. For the level of physical activity during the last
7 d at this COVID-19 time, 74% (37) had moderate activity, 26% (13) had
low activity while no patient had an intense level. There is a statistically
significant positive correlation (p=0.04) between the time spent sitting and
the WOMAC score. A negative correlation between the MET level and the
WOMAC was found, but which is statistically insignificant. For activity
level, it was only influenced by age and pain VAS (p=0.05).
Conclusion: Our knee OA patients had moderate activity at the time of
the pandemic and the level of pain; high WOMAC and age were the only
factors limiting this activity.
P763
THE CALCIUM, VITAMIN D3 AND VITAMIN B12
(INSUFFICIENCY AND DEFICIENCY BOTH) ARE THE
SIGNIFICANT RISK FACTORS FOR COVID-19
S. B. Bajaj1
1Falls Institute of India, Nagpur, India
Objective: To explain the significance of sufficient daily intake of
calcium, vitamin D3 & vitamin B12 to prevent COVID-19.
Methods: The Principal Investigator is a Consultant Orthogeriatrician
with Home Visit Practice since last 32 y. He has treated more than 100
COVID-19 patients by visits between Feb 2020 to April 2021. The
SARS-CoV-2 detection was confirmed by RT- PCR. Comprehensive
Geriatric Assessment (CGA) was the mandatory base before the initiation
of treatment. CGA is based mainly on blood tests.
Results: The data of 15 months for 100 patients shown very conclusive
results as follows: A) Sr calcium (8.10-10.4 mg/dl): Out of 100 patients, 56
were having calcium bet 8.1-8.9 mg/dl, 10 patients had <8.1 mg/dl calcium
and two were extremely deficient (3 mg/dl & 7 mg/dl only). About
32=patients had calcium >9 mg/dl. Not a single patient had calcium
>10.4 mg/dl. B) Vitamin D3 (30-100 ng/ml): out of 100 patients, 38 were
having insufficient vit D3 between 10-30 ng/ml, 8 were having vitamin D
deficiency (VDD: <10 ng/ml). Actually, 3 were severely deficient with
only 5, 5.6 & 7.5 ng/ml. Around 36 patients were having vit D3 normal but
on very lower side (bet 30-40 ng/ml). Only 16 were having it above 40
ng/ml. There was not a single patient having vit D3 toxicity i.e., >100
ng/ml. C) Vit B12 (120-914 pg/ml): out of 100 patients, 60 were having
vit B12 between 120-200 pg/ml, 10 were deficient having <120 pg/ml.
Actually, one was severely deficient (88 pg/ml). There were 20 patients
between 200-300 pg/ml. Only 8 patients were above 300 pg/ml. Two had
hypervitaminosis B12 ( >1500, >2000 pg/ml).
Conclusion: The recommended daily allowance (RDA) should be kept in
mind to fight COVID-19. The diet rich in calcium, vit D3 and vit B12 is
very important for maintaining and adding to the immunity in the fight
against COVID-19.
P764
COMPARISON OF IL-17A LEVELS AND BONE MINERAL
DENSITY IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH AND
WITHOUT PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
I. Yankova1, G. Ivanova1, A. Shinkov1, G. Kirilov1, R. Kovatcheva1
1Dept. of Endocrinology, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria
Objective: Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is a common cause of
secondary osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Bone damage is
characterized by greater involvement of cortical than trabecular bone, in
contrast to postmenopausal osteoporosis. IL17A plays an important role
in bone metabolism as it stimulates osteoclast differentiation and bone
resorption. The aim of our study was to compare IL-17A levels with
BMD and other serum markers of bone metabolism in postmenopausal
women with and without PHPT, in order to estimate the possible role of
IL-17A in PTH-induced bone remodeling.
Methods: The study included 161 postmenopausal women (mean age
61.9 (±8.19)) with biochemical data of PHPT and 54 age-matched
postmenopausal women as controls in the absence of drugs or other
diseases known to affect bone metabolism. Serum markers of mineral
metabolism, RANKL, OPG and IL-17A were determined. BMD was
measured at the lumbar spine (LS), total hip (TH), femoral neck (FN)
and distal one‐third of the nondominant radius (DR) by DXA.
Results: Women with PHPT had higher levels of IL-17A than the control
group (31.85, 19.8-44.4 pg/ml vs. 13.9, 3.1-26.6 pg/ml, p<0.001).
RANKL, OPG and RANKL/OPG did not differ between the two groups
(p>0.05). LS BMD and DR BMD were lower in the PHPT group than in
the controls (LS 0.92, 0.82-1.03 vs. 1.06, 0.92-1.19, p<0.001; DR 0.54,
0.45-0.57 vs. 0.58, 0.54-0.62, p<0.001), whereas there was no difference
in FN and TH BMD (p=0.59 and p=0.63, respectively). IL-17A
correlated positively with serum calcium and PTH (rho=0.36; p<0.001
and rho=0.19, p=0.04, respectively) and negatively with serum inorganic
phosphate (rho=-0.31; p<0.001). We found no correlation between IL-
17A and RANKL, OPG, RANKL/OPG or BMD at any skeletal site in the
whole group. A positive correlation between IL-17A levels and FN T-
score was observed in the women with PHPT (rho=0.3, p=0.04).
Conclusion: Higher levels of IL-17A in PHPT group suggest a possible
role in the PTH-induced bone remodeling. The combined bone density
S363
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
pattern is probably the effect of the constantly high PTH on the trabecular
as well as the cortical bone.
P765
EFFICIENCY OF PHYSICAL THERAPY IN NONSURGICAL
TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH CARPAL TUNNEL
SYNDROME
V. D. Caimac1, A.-M. Bumbea1, I.-R. Marcu1, C. O. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Appreciation of the usefulness of including in the
conservative medical assistance of patients diagnosed with carpal tunnel
syndrome of therapeutic means of physiotherapy, in order to control pain
and to improve the functional parameters of the upper limb.
Methods: We organized a descriptive, retrospective study that included a
number of 45 patients diagnosed with carpal tunnel syndrome. Patients
were divided into two groups: group 1 included patients who benefited
only from specific drug treatment and group 2 included patients in whom
the association between medication and means specific to physical
medicine was made (laser therapy, sonophoresis, ionization, orthosis).
The therapeutic interval taken into account was 10 days. The evaluated
parameters were represented by: pain (assessed using the visual analogue
scale, VAS, for pain), joint mobility of the fist (assessed on the flexion-
extension axis) and the Short Disability Assessment Questionnaire for
Arm, Shoulder and Hand (Quick DASH).
Results: The values of the parameters appreciated in evolution improved:
the value for VAS score for pain decreased by 43.1% in group 2
compared to 32.3% in group 1 (p=0.000054), the mobility for flexion
increased (33.4% in group 2, 26.2% in group 1), the mobility for joint
extension also increased (31.1% for group 2 and 23.2% in group
1), Quick DASH score improved (52.7% in group 2 and 41.3% in group
1). The results were statistically significant (p<0.05).
Conclusion: The results demonstrate effective pain control and
improvement of functional parameters in the study group. This fact
recommends the use of specific means of physical medicine and
rehabilitation in the complex conservative therapeutic program addressed
to patients with carpal tunnel syndrome.
P766
IMPROVING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE TREATMENT
OF CHRONIC PAIN SYNDROME IN SPONDYLOARTHROSIS
A. Pronin1, Y. Karakulova2
1City Clinical Hospital №4 Neurosurgical Department, 2Dept. of
Neurology and Medical Genetics, Perm, Russia
Objective: Back pain is an urgent and socially significant problem of
modern healthcare. More than 90% of the world's population has been
found to experience one or more episodes of back pain during their lifetime.
According to various authors, in Russia, degenerative diseases of the spine,
which in most cases are clinically manifested by pain, account for up to
76% of all cases and 72% of days of temporary disability in the outpatient
network, and in neurological hospitals 56 and 48%, respectively. The above
suggests that spinal pain is also an economic problem. The intensive
development of surgical technologies has made it possible to significantly
expand the possibilities for high quality treatment of patients with chronic
pain syndrome. 1. Radiofrequency denervation of the facet joints (RFD) is
one of the most effective treatments for chronic back pain. 2. Alternative
invasive methods of treatment are ineffective and relieve pain for a short
time. 3. Relief of pain in the lower back NSAIDs - can lead to complications
of the gastrointestinal tract. 4. Radiofrequency denervation of facet joints
(RFD) does not require a long stay in a medical institution and after its
implementation the patient can return to work in the near future. Purpose of
the study: 1. To study the clinical and neurological, emotional, cognitive
status and the quantitative content of neopterin, NSE in the blood serum of
patients. 2. Predicting the effectiveness of radioparticle denervation of facet
joints at the preoperative level in patients with spondyloarthrosis
Results: All patients had severe pain syndrome before radiofrequency
denervation of the facet joints at the L4-S1 level. The mean NSE levels
in the serum of patients before surgery were significantly higher in
spondyloarthrosis of the intervertebral joints before surgery (1.6 mg/ml)
than after RFD (1.4 mg/ml). The study of neopterin in patients at the
preoperative level showed an average value of 9.5 nmol/L, after surgery
10.1 nmol/L.
Conclusion: The results of the study showed that NSE in the serum of
patients before and after RFA is associated with back pain and varies from
patient to patient. The study of neopterin in blood serum before and after
surgery did not show a significant decrease after surgery in individual
patients.
P767
NUTRITION STATUS AND INFLAMMATORY POTENTIAL OF
THE DIET AND RISK OF OSTEOSARCOPENIA: THE
BUSHEHR ELDERLY HEALTH (BEH) PROGRAM
G. Shafiee1, M. Nasiri2, R. Heshmat1, M. Ebrahimi2, A. Ostovar3, N.
Fahimfar3, I. Nabipour4, B. Larijani5
1Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 2Dept. of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Sina
Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
3Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 4The Persian Gulf Tropical Medicine Research Center, Bushehr
University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, 5Endocrinology and
Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Osteosarcopenia is an increasingly recognized geriatric
disorder with a considerable prevalence which increases morbidity and
mortality. Inflammation and poor nutritional status are major risk factors
for many age-related diseases. Specific nutrients and dietary patterns have
been associated with inflammatory markers. This study aimed to
investigate the association of inflammatory potential of the diet and daily
nutritional intake with osteosarcopenia.
Methods: A total of 2426 Iranian adults aged ≥60 y, participating in stage
II of the BEH program, a population-based prospective cohort study,
were included in this study. Osteopenia/osteoporosis was defined as a
T-score ≤-1.0 SD below the mean values of a young healthy adult. We
defined sarcopenia as reduced skeletal muscle mass plus low muscle
strength and/or low physical performance. Osteosarcopenia was
considered as the presence of both osteopenia/osteoporosis and
sarcopenia. Dietary nutrient intakes and dietary inflammatory index
(DII) score were estimated from a 24-h recall method. Associations
between DII score and osteosarcopenia were determined by linear and
logistic regression.
Results: Among 2392 participants, 532 (22.2%) had osteosarcopenia with
mean age 73.2±7.4 y. The mean of DII was 0.07±0.37 in osteosarcopenic
group and -0.12±0.04 in normal group (P<0.001). Also, the medians of
energy intake, intake of protein and carbohydrate were significantly lower
in osteosarcopenic group. There were no significant differences in total fat
and all types of fatty acids between the osteosarcopenic and normal groups.
The DII score was positively associated with the risk of osteosarcopenia,
even after adjusting for potential covariates [aOR: 1.11(1.03-1.20)]. Also,
participates with the higher tertile of DII (pro- inflammatory diet) were
more likely to have risk of osteosarcopenia [aOR: 1.51(1.12-2.03)].
Conclusion: Results demonstrated a diet with more pro-inflammatory
potential was associated with high risk for osteoposarcopenia. Also, our
results suggested an inverse association between daily protein, energy and
carbohydrate intakes with osteosarcopenia in community-dwelling older
Iranian adults. Further studies are required to confirm these findings.
S364
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P768
COGNITIVE FRAILTY: PREVALENCE ESTIMATES AND
ASSOCIATION WITH BODY COMPOSITION IN OLDER
MEN: CROSS-SECTIONAL, POPULATION-BASED DATA
X. Sui1, L. Holloway-Kew1, K. Hyde1, J. Williams1, C. Tembo1, A.
Pasco1
1Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
Objective: Cognitive frailty, the co-presence of physical frailty and
cognitive impairment, is associated with adverse health outcomes. We
examined the prevalence of cognitive frailty for Australian men and
investigated the association of cognitive frailty with body composition.
Methods: This cross-sectional study involved 312 men ages 60-96 y
from the Geelong Osteoporosis study. Frailty was identified by low hand
grip strength (HGS, kg) measured by dynamometry, and slow gait speed
using a timed 4-m walk (m/s). Cognitive function was assessed in four
domains: psychomotor function, memory, learning, and executive
function using a computer-based program. Cognitive impairment in each
domain is scores beyond 2SD of poor performance; impairment at least in
one domain with muscle slowness or weakness is cognitive frailty.
Prevalence estimates were standardised to the Australian population.
Appendicular lean mass and total body fat mass were measured by
DXA and adjusted by height or BMI. Logistic regression analysis were
applied to investigate the association between cognitive frailly and body
composition.
Results: There were 48 (15.4%) men with cognitive impairment in any
domain, and 4 (1.3%) and 93 (30.4%) with muscle weakness or slowness,
respectively. Prevalence estimates of cognitive frailty was 8.6% (95%CI:
6.1-11.1). The prevalence of cognitive frailty increased across age groups
(p<0.001) with 2.1% in people aged 60-69 y, 5.5% in aged 70-79 y, and
30.0% in aged 80+ y. Cognitive frailty was associated with age (OR 1.15;
95%CI 1.10-1.21; p<0.001). Cognitive frailty was associated with ALM/
height2 (OR 0.56; 95%CI 0.32-0.96; p<0.05) and ALM/BMI (OR 0.02;
95%CI 0-0.93; p<0.05) independent of age.
Conclusion: This is the first Australian study to report cognitive frailty
prevalence. Future studies are warranted to explore the underlying
pathophysiology and intervention programs to cognitive frailty.
P769
SKELETAL MANIFESTATIONS OF KLIPPEL TRENAUNAY
WEBER SYNDROME: A CASE REPORT
V. Khanna1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics, Kailash Hospital, Khurja, India
It is a congenital vascular disorder that consists of a “triad” of symptoms
affecting either one or more limbs. This “triad” constitutes bone and soft
tissue hypertrophy, varicose veins, and cutaneous hemangioma. Bony
and soft tissue hypertrophy may lead to the affected limb becoming either
very large or very small. Cutaneous hemangioma may present either as a
port-wine stain or nevus. This is generally accompanied by varicose veins
which are often very numerous. It is most commonly seen in childhood or
adolescent age groups. This report describes the skeletal manifestation
along with diagnostic signs of Klippel Trenaunay syndrome.
Case report: A 35-year-old man reported with the triad associated with
Klippel Trenaunay syndrome. On clinical examination, substantial port
wine stain was seen and radiographs showed multiple bony outgrowths
whereas MRI showed multiple varicosities displaying heterogeneous
hyperintense signals on T2 Weighted Images and T1 hypointensity with
hypertrophy of soft tissue in the left lower limb. He was concerned with
cosmetic issues caused due to the hypertrophy of the lower limbs. Due to
the various vascular malformations and since the patient did not have any
functional impairment it was deemed unwise to offer him surgical
intervention. Hence, the patient was counselled regarding the nature of
his condition and no intervention was done for this patient.
P770
LOW-LEVEL INFLAMMATION AND COMORBID
PATHOLOGY IN OSTEOARTHRITIS
Y. Polyakova1, L. Seewordova1, Y. Akhverdyan1, E. Papichev1, B.
Zavodovsky1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Institute of Clinical and
Experimental Rheumatology A.B. Zborovsky”, Volgograd, Russia
Objective: The combination of osteoarthritis (OA) with metabolic
disorders and diseases of the cardiovascular system leads to a significant
deterioration in the quality of life and a high level of physical disability.
Aim: Determination of the level of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase
(Nampt) in the serum of patients with OA without comorbid diseases (CR),
with OA and cardiovascular diseases (CVD), with OA, CVD and metabolic
syndrome (MS) to clarify significant risk factors for the production of pro-
inflammatory cytokines in patients with OA.
Methods: 120 people were examined: 30 people - a group without signifi-
cant diseases, 20patients withOA, 40- withOA andCVD, and30-withOA,
CVD and MS. The average level of Nampt in the blood serum was minimal
and amounted to 24.3±2.86 ng/ml (M±SD), in patients with OA without
significant comorbid diseases - 27.21±5.7 ng/ml (p=0.02), the highest in
patients with OA, CVD and MS – 42.29±12.77 ng/ml (p<0.0001).
Results: There was no difference in the dependence of the level of
circulating Nampt in patients with OA without CR and patients with OA
and GB (p=0.08), there was a significant difference in the level of Nampt in
patients with OA without CR and OA in combination with CHD, the
maximum level of Nampt was detected in patients with MS. This group
hadthe largest waistsize (OT)- 105.13±13.39,the highest BMI-33.6±4.99.
Conclusion: A significant positive correlation was found between
Nampt, ESR, and CRP. A high association of Nampt with BMI was
found in patients with OA without CR (rs=0.6803), and with OT in
patients with OA and MS (rs=0.6395). Discussion. The main source of
Nampt was thought to be abdominal fat cells. Nampt has been proven to
synthesize monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, T cells, and B cells.
Visceral fat is more active than subcutaneous and lean tissue. Normally,
the level of Nampt correlates with BMI, in MS - with the volume of
visceral fat, in acute damage - with the intensity of the inflammatory
process. The level of Nampt in the serum of patients with OA increases
with an increase in comorbid pathology, has a direct correlation with
highly sensitive CRP, ESR, and simple anthropometric indicators -
BMI and OT. OT most accurately reflects the severity of abdominal
obesity and low level inflammation, companions of the metabolic
syndrome. The positive correlation between laboratory markers of
inflammation and OT confirms the role of Nampt as a proinflammatory
cytokine in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease progression in
patients with OA and MS. Abdominal obesity is the leading risk factor
for maintaining low-level inflammation, and it is a modifiable factor in
contrast to age and heredity. The study showed a link between laboratory
markers of inflammation, anthropometric indicators, and Nampt
concentrations. Overweight and increased waist circumference are the
most significant predictors of low-level inflammation in patients with
OA and comorbidity, and are positively correlated with higher
concentrations of highly sensitive C-reactive protein and ESR.
P771
OSTEOSARCOPENIA AND BIOMARKERS OF BONE HEALTH
IN IRANIAN OLDER PEOPLE: THE BUSHEHR ELDERLY
HEALTH (BEH) PROGRAM
G. Shafiee1, M. Fathi2, M. Moghaddassi3, R. Heshmat1, M. Ebrahimi2, A.
Salimzadeh3, A. Ostovar4, I. Nabipour5, B. Larijani6
1Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 2Dept. of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Sina
Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
S365
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
3Rheumatology Research Center, Sina Hospital, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, 4Osteoporosis Research Center,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 5The Persian Gulf Tropical
Medicine Research Center, Bushehr University of Medical Sciences,
Bushehr, 6Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Osteosarcopenia is referred to as co-incidence of
osteoporosis/osteopenia and sarcopenia which is defined as a geriatric
syndrome with a significant prevalence that increases morbidity and
mortality. There are some predictive factors that can show an increased
risk of incidence of osteosarcopenia. This study aimed to consider the
association of bone turnover markers and also some other risk factor like
vitamin D deficiency with osteosarcopenia in elderly.
Methods: We carried out a cross-sectional study on a random sample
including 400 elder participants of BEH study, in Iran. Osteopenia/
osteoporosis was defined as a T-score ≤-1.0 SD below the mean values
of a young healthy adult. We defined sarcopenia as low muscle strength
with reduced skeletal muscle mass. Osteosarcopenia was considered as
the presence of both osteopenia/osteoporosis and sarcopenia. We
estimated the age-standardized prevalence of osteosarcopenia for men
and women, separately. We used multivariable logistic regression to
address the factors associated with osteosarcopenia.
Results: The total prevalence of osteosarcopenia was 19.1%. The results
showed that there was a statistically significant difference in osteocalcin
(OC), C-terminal cross-linked telopeptide (CTX), and tartrate resistant
acid phosphatase (TRAP) were between the normal and osteosarcopenia
groups. No statistically significant difference was observed in bone
alkaline phosphatase (BALP), vitamin D, calcium, phosphorous, and
ALP between the compared groups. In the multivariable logistic
regression model, OC and CTX were associated with increased likelihood
of osteosarcopenia [adjusted OR=1.023(1.002-1.045 for OC,
4.363(1.389-15.474 for CTX)]. Furthermore, TRAP increases the odds
of osteosarcopenia in crude model [OR=1.333 (1.070- 1.660)].
Conclusion: We observed osteosarcopenia in around 19.1% of our elder
population that is a slightly high prevalence for a developing country.
Any change in the density of bone biomarkers particularly OC, CTX, and
TRAP should be considered as a predictor of osteosarcopenia.
P772
IS THERE A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE C174G
P O L Y M O R P H I S M
O F
I N T E R L E U K I N - 6
A N D
OSTEOPOROSIS?
S. Y. Tsarenok1, V. V. Gorbunov1, T. A. Aksenova1
1Chita State Medical Academy, Chita, Russia
Objective: The Wnt signaling pathway and immune factors play an
important role in the regulation of bone remodeling; therefore, the IL-6
gene is considered as a candidate gene for postmenopausal osteoporosis.
The role of IL-6 in the development of osteoporosis has been determined;
this cytokine activates bone resorption by increasing RANK activity. This
study aimed to study the C174G polymorphism of the IL-6 gene in
women with osteoporosis and osteoporotic fractures.
Methods: 162 women of the postmenopausal period, living in the Trans-
Baikal Territory, of Russian nationality were examined (age from 60-76
years old). Verification of the diagnosis of osteoporosis was performed
according to the current recommendations: with a high 10-y fracture risk
according to FRAX, with a history of low-energy fracture, or with X-ray
densitometry with T-score values of -2.5 SD and below. Osteoporosis
was diagnosed in 76 patients, 86 women with coronary artery disease
without osteoporosis made up the comparison group. Statistical analysis
was performed using the χ2 test and the odds ratio. Our statistical analysis
showed that the distribution of genotypes of the studied IL-6 gene
polymorphism in the examined women obeys the Hardy-Weinberg law
(p> 0.05).
Results: We did not find significant differences in the distribution of
alleles in the comparison group and in the group of women with
osteoporosis. When studying the frequency of occurrence of different
variants of genotypes of C174G IL-6 polymorphism, no statistically
significant differences were also found between the comparison group
and the group of women with osteoporosis (Table 1). However, it should
be noted that the C allele and CC genotype were more common in the
group of women with osteoporosis, and the odds ratios were 1.21 and
1.36, respectively.
Table 1. Frequency of alleles and genotypes of the C174G polymorphism
of the IL-6 gene.
Polymorphism
IL-6 gene
C174G
Frequency
Control
group,
N=86
Women with
osteoporosis,
N=76
Χ2, р
OR
95%CI
Allele
C
0,480
0,53
0,36
1,21
0,79-1,876
G
0,52
0,47
0,82
0,53-1,26
Genotype
CC
25,3
31,6
0,36
1,36
0,69-2,68
GG
28,6
25,0
0,69
0,83
0,41-1,66
CG
46,1
43,4
0,67
0,89
0,48-1,65
Table 2. Frequency of alleles and genotypes depending on the
localization of osteoporotic fractures.
Polymorphism
IL-6 gene
C174G
Frequency
Control
group,
N=86
Χ2, р Women
with
osteoporosis,
N=76
OR
95%CI
Radial bone fracture
Allele
C
0,49
0,55
0,32
1,26
0,789-2,038
G
0,51
0,45
0,97
0,789-2,038
Genotype
CC
25,3
33,9
0,25
1,28
0,842-1,958
GG
28,6
23,2
0,96
0,83
0,507-1,381
CG
46,1
42,9
0,69
0,92
0,606-1,398
Vertebral fractures
Allele
C
0,49
0,42
0,49
0,73
0,326-1,723
G
0,51
0,58
0,978
0,326-1,723
Genotype
CC
25,3
15,4
0,43
0,57
0,136-2,421
GG
28,6
30,8
0,87
1,096
0,365-3,289
CG
46,1
53,8
0,6
1,31
0,472-3,632
Hip fracture
Allele
C
0,49
0,5
0,96
1,0
0,345-3,036
G
0,51
0,5
0,978
0,345-3,036
Genotype
CC
25,3
14,3
0,51
0,514
0,065-4,046
GG
28,6
14,3
0,41
0,43
0,055-3,474
CG
46,1
71,4
0,019
5,5
0,65-43,8
As can be seen from Table 2, the association of the C174G polymorphism
of the IL-6 gene with fractures of the radius and vertebral fractures was
not established, although the carriage of the C and CC alleles of the
genotype is accompanied by a slight increase in the risk of fractures of
the radius (OR was 1.26 and 1.28, respectively). With regard to hip
fracture, it was found that the presence of the CG genotype of the
C174G polymorphism of the IL-6 gene is associated with a fivefold
increase in its risk (OR - 5.5, 95%CI - 0.65-43.8).
Conclusion: Thus, the C174G polymorphism of the IL-6 gene is
associated with an osteoporotic hip fracture: carriers of the CG genotype
have a 5.5-fold increased risk of hip fracture. The association of this
polymorphism with the presence of osteoporosis and other localizations
of osteoporotic fractures has not been established.
S366
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P773
NAILFOLD CAPILLAROSCOPY IN EARLY STAGES OF
MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE IN EGYPTIAN
PATIENTS
Y. G. Gazar1, H. H. Hamoud1, S. I. Ismail2
1Al-Azhar University Hospitals, 2National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt
Objective: Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) is a systemic
autoimmune disease with a high titer of anti-U1RNP and a number of
clinical pictures mainly Raynaud's phenomenon. Nailfold capillaroscopy
(NFC) is a noninvasive diagnostic tool for patients with different connective
tissue diseases (CTDs) that permit the detection of local microvascular
changes that correlate with systemic vascular involvement. Aim of the
study: comparing the results of NFC in patients with systemic sclerosis to
determine the chief characteristics of skin microangiopathy in early MCTD
and trying to describe a characteristic MCTD pattern in Egyptian patients.
Methods: This cross-sectional study included 40 patients diagnosed with
mixed connective tissue disease according to Alarcón-Segovia and
Villareal criteria and 20 patients with confirmed systemic sclerosis
according to ACR and EULAR classification criteria for systemic
sclerosis. Nailfold examination for study subjects was done describing
architectural, derangement, capillary density changes, mega capillary and
enlarged loops, microhemorrhages, and angiogenesis.
Results: Of the 60 patients studied, 49 (81.7%) patients were females and
11 were males with a mean age of 31 y. Three of the 20 patients
diagnosed with systemic sclerosis had arthritis. Out of 60 patients,
53.3% had thickened skin, 19 patients exhibited puffy fingers, 6 patients
showed rash and none had swollen joints. skin thickening was
significantly higher in systemic sclerosis patients (85%) compared to
37.5% in the MCTD population. Patients presented with various
comorbidities, the most common of which was Fatigue (26.7%) and
myositis (23% of patients). There is a significant negative correlation of
-0.508 (P=0.022) between the enlargement scores and illness duration in
systemic sclerosis patients. Those patients also exhibited a statistically
significant positive correlation of 0.520 (P=0.019) between hemorrhage
score and the number of tender joints. Alternatively, patients diagnosed
with mixed connective tissue disease exhibited a significant positive
correlation between the architecture scores of their joints and both; the
duration of their illness (0.347; P=0.028) and the number of swollen joints
(0.424 P=0.006). Mixed connective tissue disease patients also showed a
significant correlation of 0.423 (P=0.007) between their hemorrhage
scores and their age at the time of the study.
Table 1. Capillaroscopy scores according to some clinical findings among
the mixed type.
Variables
Positive
Negative
#p-value
Skin thickening
Architecture
1.0 (1.0–1.0)
1.0 (1.0–1.0)
0.868
Density
2.0 (1.0–2.0)
1.0 (0.0–2.0)
0.094
Enlargement
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
1.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.562
Hemorrhage
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.244
Neoangeogensis
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.543
Total
4.0 (2.0–5.0)
3.0 (1.0–4.0)
0.233
Puffy fingers
Architecture
1.0 (1.0–1.0)
1.0 (1.0–2.0)
0.932
Density
2.0 (0.0–2.0)
1.0 (0.0–2.0)
0.360
Enlargement
1.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.588
Hemorrhage
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.100
Neoangeogensis
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.441
Total
5.0 (2.0–6.0)
3.0 (1.0–4.0)
0.078
Anemia
Architecture
1.0 (1.0–1.0)
1.0 (1.0–2.0)
0.799
Density
1.0 (0.0–2.0)
1.0 (0.0–2.0)
0.824
Enlargement
1.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.483
Hemorrhage
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.679
Neoangeogenesis
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.949
Total
4.0 (2.0–5.0)
3.0 (1.0–4.0)
0.824
Fatigue
Architecture
1.0 (1.0–1.0)
1.0 (1.0–1.0)
0.794
Density
1.0 (1.0–2.0)
1.0 (0.0–2.0)
0.842
Enlargement
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
1.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.724
Hemorrhage
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.0 (0.0–1.0)
0.346
Neoangeogenesis
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.0 (0.0–0.0)
0.450
Total
2.5 (1.0–4.0)
4.0 (1.0–5.0)
0.379
Data presented as median (1st-3rd interquartile). #Mann Whitney test.
*Significant
Table 2. Correlation between capillaroscopy scores and other variables.
Arch
Dense
Enlarg
He
Neoang
Total
SSc
Age
r
-0.004
0.221
-0.219
-0.098
0.280
0.035
p
0.987
0.349
0.353
0.680
0.231
0.884
Duration
r
-0.210
-0.087
-0.508
-0.332
0.181
-0.378
p
0.373
0.715
0.022*
0.153
0.445
0.100
Tender
r
0.215
0.040
0.171
0.520
0.355
0.409
p
0.363
0.868
0.472
0.019*
0.125
0.074
Swollen
r
0.128
0.342
0.145
0.202
0.293
0.369
p
0.591
0.140
0.543
0.394
0.210
0.109
Mixed
Age
r
0.201
0.190
-0.135
0.423
0.020
0.216
p
0.215
0.240
0.405
0.007*
0.904
0.181
Duration
r
0.347
0.122
0.079
0.234
0.053
0.293
p
0.028*
0.454
0.629
0.146
0.744
0.067
Tender
r
0.171
-0.027
0.260
-0.054
-0.138
0.082
p
0.291
0.869
0.105
0.739
0.394
0.615
Swollen
r
0.424
0.287
-0.040
0.041
0.149
0.306
p
0.006*
0.072
0.808
0.801
0.359
0.055
Spearman correlation. *Significant
Conclusion: NFC is a noninvasive, rapid, easy, cost-effective method for
studying nailfold capillaries in MCTDs. In this study, the results obtained
were qualitatively satisfactory for a clear delineation of the nailfold
capillaries features in MCTD. Therefore, it aids in the recognition of
alternations in nailfold capillaries making early diagnosis of MCTD
possible and thus preventing morbidities and sequelae of the disease.
P774
THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN MUSCLE INDICATORS AND
BONE MASS DENSITY AND RELATED RISK FACTORS IN
THE DIABETIC ELDERLY POPULATION: BUSHEHR
ELDERLY HEALTH (BEH) PROGRAM
R. Heshmat1, M. Nikfarjam1, G. Shafiee1, S. Gharibzadeh2, A. Ostovar3,
I. Nabipour4, B. Larijani5
S367
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 2Dept. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Pasteur Institute of Iran,
Tehran, 3Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 4The Persian Gulf Tropical Medicine Research Center, Bushehr
University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, 5Endocrinology & Metabolism
Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Decreased muscle mass and strength and bone mass density
are one of the complications of the aging process. Studies show that the
prevalence of sarcopenia and osteoporosis may be higher in patients with
diabetes. Therefore, this study was aimed to investigate the relationship
between muscle mass and strength indices and bone mass density in
diabetic elderly.
Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted based on the data
collected during the BEH Program, stage II. Diabetes was defined as FPG
≥126 mg/dl or HbA1C ≥6.5 or taking antidiabetic medication. DXA
(Discovery WI, Hologic Inc, USA) was used to measure BMD, fat mass,
trabecular bone score (TBS) and muscle mass. Muscle strength was
measured by grip strength. Osteoporosis were defined as the BMD of ≥2.5
SD below the average value of young normal adults (T-score of ≤-2.5 SD) in
the femoral neck, or lumbar spine (L1-L4) or total hip. To determine the
relationship between skeletal muscle index (SMI) and strength on bone
status in a continuous scale (BMD L1-L4, BMD total hip, BMD femoral
neck, and TBS L1-L4) and estimate the effect of SMI and muscle strength
on osteoporosis from linear regression and Pearson’s correlation coefficient
and modified Poisson regression was used for analysis, respectively.
Results: In this study, 759 diabetic elderly were included. SMI and
muscle strength were related to BMD in the spinal L1-L4, femur neck,
total hip, and TBS L1-L4 after adjusted in full models (P-value <0.001).
Only, in model 2 (adjusted for age and sex effect), there was no significant
relationship between muscle strength and BMD in spinal L1-L4 and TBS
L1-L4. Also, increased SMI and muscle strength was associated with
decreased osteoporosis in crude and adjusted models.
Conclusion: In this study, it was revealed that the reduction of SMI in
elderly patients with diabetes was significantly associated with decreased
bone mass density and TBS. Besides moreover, the muscle strength was
also associated with BMD and TBS. So, muscle strength and muscle
mass should be measured separately ever since both are independently
associated with BMD.
P775
SOCIOECONOMIC INEQUALITIES IN OSTEOSARCOPENIA
AMONG COMMUNITY DWELLING OLDER PEOPLE:
FINDINGS FROM THE BUSHEHR ELDERLY HEALTH (BEH)
PROGRAM
R. Heshmat1, M. Raznahan2, G. Shafiee1, A. Ostovar3, N. Fahimfar3, I.
Nabipour4, B. Larijani5
1Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 2Maternal, Fetal & Neonatal Research Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 3Osteoporosis Research
Center, Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 4The Persian Gulf
Tropical Medicine Research Center, Bushehr University of Medical
Sciences, Bushehr, 5Endocrinology & Metabolism Research Center,
Endocrinology & Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: Osteosacopenia is a common problem in elderly with the
adverse outcomes. Although social inequalities in health have been
recognized for centuries but it is unknown in osteosarcopenia. The aim
of this study was to investigate the socioeconomic inequality of
osteosarcopenia among the Iranian older people.
Methods: A total of 2426 adults aged ≥60 y, participating in the stage II
of BEH program, a population-based prospective cohort study; were
included in this study. Osteosarcopenia was defined as having
osteopenia/osteoporosis with sarcopenia. Socioeconomic status (SES)
was measured by an asset index, constructed using principal component
analysis, income, education level, and employment status. The
Concentration Index and the Lorenz curve were used to illustrate the
levels of inequality for osteosarcopenia.
Results: The prevalence of osteosarcopenia was 532 (22.2%). The results of
study showed that the concentration index of osteosarcopenia which is
respectively obtained 0.0293, 0.0435, and 0.0301 for total, women, and
men, by indicating that the intended outcome is not equally distributed
among different socioeconomic groups. Osteosarcopenia was statistically
significant and more prevalent in the richest individuals compared to the
other quintilesinourstudy. Thepositiveconcentrationindexofthe variables
such as men, individuals with high body mass, and those receiving greater
daily protein indicated that had higher Scio economic status. However, the
negative values of the variables such as the history of falling more than once
and fracture after the age of 45 y, as well as disabled individuals showed that
had lower socioeconomic status (lower economic quintile). The total
contribution (%) of the variables considered in nonlinear model explained
91.65% of the economic inequality of osteosarcopenia, while 8.35% of total
inequality cannot to be justified by the variables in our study.
Conclusion: It was concluded that socioeconomic status plays an
important role in happening osteosarcopenia among Iranian older people.
It seems to be necessary a focus on reducing the economic inequalities
among osteosarcopenic people in Iran.
P776
IMMEDIATE EFFECT OF PILATES EXERCISE THERAPY IN
YOUNG ADULTS WITH NONSPECIFIC LOW BACK PAIN
D. Wadhwa1, A. Kaur1, J. Khan1
1MVPS College of Physiotherapy, Nashik, Maharashtra, India,
Objective: Low back pain affects the person's ability to keep balance,
especially in challenging conditions. This study aimed to study the
immediate effect of pilates exercise therapy on pain and dynamic postural
control in young adults with nonspecific low back pain (NSLBP).
Methods: A quasi-experimental study consisted of 30 subjects. The
inclusion criteria was age 20-40 y, both genders, subjects with NSLBP
since at least 3 months and 4-7 on Numerical Pain Rating Scale (NPRS).
The exclusion criteria was neurological and respiratory disease, spine
surgery, medication or condition affecting balance, regular practice of
pilates or any specific exercise program in the last 6 months. The outcome
measures were taken pre- and postintervention. They were SEBT (Star
Excursion Balance Test) and NPRS. The exercise session composed of 4
exercises viz. The single leg stretch (level 1), the pelvic press (level 1),
swimming (level 1), opposite arm and leg reach (bird dog) (level 1). Each
set was performed with 10 reps.
Results: The p-value of pre and post treatment was significant.
Table.
Pre
Post
P value
T value
Significance
Mean±SD
Mean±SD
NPRS
5.633±0.9643
4.433
±0.9353
< 0.0001
9.872
Significant
SEBT
Anterior
79.483±8.082
84.067
±8.602
0.0377
2.127
Significant
Posterolateral
53.367
±11.031
58.4± 11.273
<0.0001
11.850
Significant
Posteromedial
47.967±8.181
52.867
±8.089
0.0231
2.333
Significant
S368
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: Pilates exercises immediately reduced the pain and
improved dynamic postural control in young adults with NSLBP.
P777
RECOVERY OF QUALITY OF LIFE IS ASSOCIATED WITH
LOWER MORTALITY 5 YEARS POSTFRACTURE: THE
AUSTRALIAN ARM OF THE INTERNATIONAL COSTS AND
UTILITIES RELATED TO OSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES
STUDY (AUSICUROS)
J. Talevski1, K. Sanders1, S. Vogrin1, G. Duque1, A. Beauchamp2, E.
Seeman1, S. Iuliano1, A. Svedbom3, F. Borgström4, J. A. Kanis5, A.
Stuart6, S. Brennan-Olsen6
1The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia, 3ICON Plc, Stockholm, Sweden,
4Quantify Research, Stockholm, Sweden, 5University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK, 6Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
Objective: To determine whether recovery of HRQoL 12-months
postfracture is associated with lower 5-y all-cause mortality.
Methods: This prospective study included 524 older adults (mean age:
70.2 y; % female: 79.2) with a fracture (150 hip, 261 distal forearm, 61
vertebral, 52 humerus) recruited from 8 study centers across Australia.
HRQoL was assessed using the EuroQoL questionnaire (EQ-5D-3L) at
baseline (including recall of the patient’s HRQoL prior to fracture), and
at 4- and 12-months postfracture. Recovery of HRQoL was calculated as
the difference between EQ-5D-3L utility scores at prefracture and 12
months and then dichotomized (a HRQoL change score >0 was categorized
as ‘recovered’ and a score <0 was categorized as ‘not recovered’. All-cause
mortality data was ascertained from the Australian National Death Index.
Linkage between AusICUROS participants and National Death Index data
was undertaken using secure probabilistic linkage software. Overall
survival was compared between the two HRQoL groups (recovered vs.
not recovered) using a two-sided log-rank test. Cox proportional hazards
models were used to assess the association between all-cause mortality
within 5 y and HRQoL recovery (vs. nonrecovery). Analyses by fracture
type was not undertaken due to insufficient sample size.
Results: Overall, 279 participants (53.2%) recovered to their prefracture
HRQoL at 12-month follow-up. There were 70 deaths (13.4%) during the
5 y postfracture. Mortality rate was highest in hip fracture participants
(24.7%), followed by vertebral (16.4%), humeral (13.5%) and distal
forearm fracture participants (6.1%). After adjustment for age, sex,
prefracture HRQoL, and fracture site, mortality risk was lower in
participants who recovered their prefracture HRQoL at 12 months
compared to those who did not (HR=0.56, 95%CI: 0.33-0.96, p=0.034).
Conclusion: This study provides evidence that HRQoL recovery post-
fracture is associated with improved 5-y survival in older adults. Our
results suggest that current postfracture interventions known to improve
HRQoL may also have the potential to prevent deaths in older adults after
fracture.
P778
ASSOCIATION OF BONE TURNOVER MARKERS WITH
TRABECULAR BONE SCORE AND BONE MINERAL
DENSITY AMONG PRE- AND POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN:
A STUDY FROM SRI LANKA
H. Rathnayake1, S. Lekamwasam2, C. Wickramatilake1, J. Lenora3
1Dept. of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ruhuna, 2Dept.
of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ruhuna, 3Dept. of
Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka
Objective: Data on the association between bone turnover markers
(BTMs) and BMD/trabecular bone score (TBS) are not available for Sri
Lankans. This study evaluated the association of serum BTMs with BMD
and TBS among pre- and postmenopausal women.
Methods: A descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted in Galle
District, Southern Province, Sri Lanka. Community dwelling women
aged 20-70 y (n=347) were recruited using multistage stratified random
sampling technique. Menopausal status was defined as the presence of
amenorrhea for more than 12 consecutive months due to natural
causes. BMDs of hip (THBMD), femoral neck (FNBMD), lumbar spine
(LSBMD) and total body (TBBMD) were measured by DXA (Hologic
Discovery, Bedford, MA, USA). TBS was estimated by TBS iNsight®
software. Serum crosslinked C-telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX; bone
resorption marker) and procollagen type I N-propeptide (PINP; bone
formation marker) were measured using ELISA. Partial correlation
(adjusted for possible confounders) was used to assess the correlations.
Results: In premenopausal women, CTX showed significant negative
correlations with LSBMD, TBBMD and TBS and PINP showed weak
but significant negative correlation with LSBMD (Table). In
postmenopausal women, CTX showed significant negative correlations
with BMDs of all sites and TBS nevertheless, PINP did not show
significant correlations with BMDs or TBS.
Table: Correlations of BTMs with BMD and TBS according to
menopausal status.
Variable
Premenopausal
women (n=207)
Postmenopausal
women (n=140)
CTX (ng/mL)
PINP (pg/mL)
CTX (ng/mL)
PINP (pg/mL)
r (p)
r (p)
r (p)
r (p)
THBMD (g/cm2)
-0.13 (0.06)
-0.09 (0.21)
-0.31 (<0.001)*
-0.03 (0.76)
FNBMD (g/cm2)
-0.11 (0.11)
0.03 (0.68)
-0.11 (0.028)*
0.02 (0.80)
LSBMD (g/cm2)
-0.24 (0.001)*
-0.14 (0.042)*
-0.28 (0.001)*
-0.01 (0.87)
TBBMD (g/cm2)
-0.22 (0.001)*
-0.12 (0.10)
-0.34 (<0.001)*
-0.02 (0.79)
TBS
-0.21 (0.002)*
-0.04 (0.56)
-0.30 (<0.001)*
-0.12 (0.17)
*Correlation was significant at 0.05 level
Conclusion: Bone resorption marker CTX has better association with
BMDs and TBS in women regardless of menopausal status than bone
formation marker, PINP. This may indicate the imbalance between bone
resorption and formation in adult women even before the onset of
menopause.
P779
ORAL CALCITRIOL USE, VERTEBRAL FRACTURES AND
VASCULAR CALCIFICATIONS IN HEMODIALYSIS
PATIENTS: RESULTS FROM VITIMIN K ITALIAN (VIKI)
STUDY
M. Fusaro1, A. Aghi2, C. Politi3, T. L. Nickolas4, P. Khairallah4, M. C.
Mereu5, G. Tripepi3
1National Research Council (CNR) – Institute of Clinical Physiology
(IFC), Pisa, Italy, 2Dept. of Medicine, Clinica Medica 1, University of
Padua, Padova, Italy, 3CNR-IFC, Clinical Epidemiology of Renal
Diseases and Hypertension, Ospedali Riuniti, Reggio Calabria, Italy,
4Division of Nephrology, Dept. of Medicine, Columbia University Irving
Medical Center, New York, USA, 5Independent Research, Cagliari, Italy
Objective: Chronic Kidney Disease patients are characterized by
alterations in bone and vascular metabolism associated to adverse clinical
outcomes such as fractures, cardiovascular events and mortality.
Dysregulation of vitamin D hormonal system, in levels of calcium,
phosphate, PTH, FGF23/Klotho are the main responsible of these
changes. We want to evaluate if oral calcitriol use can play a protective
role on fractures in hemodialysis (HD) patients.
Methods: We included 387 HD patients of the VIKI database, a
multicenter cross-sectional study. Biomarkers measured: vitamin K,
VKDPs, vitamin 25(OH) D, ALP, PTH, Ca, P. Spine radiograph
performed to define the presence of vertebral fractures (VF) and vascular
S369
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
calcification (VC). VF was indicated as >20% reduction of vertebral body
height and VCs were quantified by measuring the length of calcium
deposits along the arteries.
Results: 45.7% of patients were treated with oral calcitriol. No
biochemical differences was observed between the treated and untreated
patients. VFs were significantly lower in patients receiving oral calcitriol
(48.6% vs. 61%, P=0.015), the presence of VCs was similar (aortic:
81.9% vs. 79.5% respectively, P=0.552; iliac: 52.0% and 59.5%,
P=0.167). In a multivariable logistic regression analysis, after adjustment
for all potential confounders, oral calcitriol was associated with a marked
reduction (-40.2%) of the odds of fractures (OR: 0.598, 95%CI: 0.363-
0.985, P=0.043).
Conclusion: We found a significant association between oral calcitriol
use and lower VF rate in HD patients. Further prospective and
interventional studies are needed to confirm these findings.
Figure. Frequency of vertebral fractures and vascular calcifications by
oral calcitriol treatment (Yes/No). A. Rate of vertebral fractures. B.
Rate and severity of aortic calcifications. C. Rate and severity of iliac
calcifications.
P780
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FRAGILITY SCORE MEASURED
BY RADIOFREQUEN CY ECHOGRAPH IC MULTI
SPECTROMETRY (REMS) FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF
INCIDENT FRACTURE RISK
D. Ciardo1, P. Pisani1, F. A. Lombardi1, R. Franchini1, F. Conversano1,
S. Casciaro1
1National Research Center - Institute of Clinical Physiology, Lecce, Italy
Objective: To evaluate the effectiveness of Fragility Score (FS) [1],
measured by radiofrequency echographic multi spectrometry (REMS)
technology, in identifying women with incident osteoporotic fractures
within 5 y.
Methods: Caucasian women between 30-90 y were scanned with REMS
and DXA at lumbar spine and/or femoral neck. During an up to 5-y
follow-up, the occurrence of osteoporotic fractures was recorded. The
ability of the FS to discriminate between patients with and without
incident fragility fractures was subsequently evaluated and compared
with the discriminatory ability of the T-score calculated with DXA and
with REMS. In particular, the associations between lumbar spine FS and
major osteoporotic fractures and between femoral neck FS and hip
osteoporotic fractures were investigated.
Results: 583 couples of lumbar spine REMS and DXA scans and 524
couples of femoral neck scans were analysed. During the follow-up, 82
patients (14.1%) sustained a major osteoporotic fracture and 11 (2.1%)
sustained a hip fracture. Comparing the areas under the curve (AUCs), the
FS showed a statistically significant higher capability to discriminate
between patients with/without fragility fractures with respect to T-
scores (Fig.1): for lumbar spine, AUC was 0.80 for FS, 0.66 for DXA
T-score and 0.70 for REMS T-score; for femoral neck, AUC was 0.84 for
FS, 0.66 for DXA T-score and 0.69 for REMS T-score.
Conclusion: The Fragility Score, measured at reference anatomical sites
by a nonionizing REMS scan, showed an ability to discriminate incident
fractures at a higher rate than T-score values measured by DXA or
REMS, representing an effective diagnostic tool for the early
identification and treatment of bone fragility.Reference: 1. Pisani P
et al. Measurement 2017;101:243.
P781
THIRTY YEARS OF HIP FRACTURE IN AUSTRIA; IS THE
WORST OVER?
H. P. Dimai1, B. Reichardt2, E. Zitt3, H. Concin3, O. Malle1, A.
Fahrleitner-Pammer1, A. Svedbom4, W. Brozek5
1Division of Endocrinology & Diabetology, Dept. of Internal Medicine,
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Austrian Health Insurance
Fund, Eisenstadt, Austria, 3Agency for Preventive and Social Medicine,
Bregenz, Austria, 4ICON Plc, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Agency for
Preventive and Social Medicine, Bregenz, Austria
Objective: Austria is among the countries with the highest hip fracture
incidence worldwide, exceeded only by Sweden and Denmark (1).
Nationwide hip fracture incidences over a period of 20 years (1989-
2008) have shown an initial steep increase, followed by a levelling off
during the last few years of observation (2). The purpose of the present
study was to follow up on hip fracture incidences for another 10 y (2009-
2018), and to analyze trends over the entire period of 30 y.
Methods: ICD-10 code classes S72.0, S72.1, and S72.2 were applied.
For the entire population ≥50 y of age, all data were retrieved from the
Statistics Austria database and its hospital discharge register. Annual
absolute numbers, crude and age-standardized incidences were stratified
by sex and 5-y age intervals, and calculated by using a correction factor
for multiple registrations.
Results: Annual discharges due to hip fracture increased between 1989
(n=9572) and 2006 (n=15,941), followed by a sideways movement until
2018 (Fig.1). In women, numbers rose from 7528 (1989) to a maximum
of 11,811 (2006), to drop to 11,105 in 2018. In contrast, number of hip
fractures in men increased steadily from 2044 (1989) to a maximum of
4958 in 2018. Age-standardized incidence rates in women peaked at 689/
100,000 (2003), and in men at 294/100,000 (2006). Thereafter, they
decreased in women to 517/100,000 (2018), and to 242/100,000 in men
(Fig.2). For both sexes, an incidence rate ratio (IRR) of 0.984 (95%CI
0.981-0.987) was observed, corresponding to an average annual decrease
in age-standardized hip fracture incidence of 1.6% (1.3-1.9%) from 2009-
2018.
S370
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: While absolute numbers of hip fracture in women showed a
slight decrease during the last 10 y of observation, numbers in men
continued to increase since 1989, suggesting that at least in men the worst
is not yet over. Age-standardized incidences nevertheless decreased in
both men and women, and this may be interpreted as a trend into the right
direction.
References:
1.
Kanis JA, et al. Osteoporos Int 2012;23:2239
2.
Dimai HP, et al. Osteoporos Int 2011;22:685
P782
U N U S U A L B U T C O M M O N C O M P L I C A T I O N O F
OSTEOPOROSIS TREATMENT: A CASE SERIES OF BRONJ
T. C. Goh1, J. Sivashanumugam1, R. Muthusamy1, A. Gerarde Paul2
1Hospital Lahad Datu, Lahad Datu, Malaysia, 2Hospital Queen Elizabeth,
Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia
Objective: Bisphosphonates are commonly used in Malaysia especially
in Borneo's tertiary hospital due to its easy availability and is cheap. Its act
as bone resorption inhibitors in healthy individuals. Usage of
bisphosphonate has risen to 73% in Malaysia compared to other mode
of therapy, especially in postmenopausal group of women more than 50
years old. It has been known for subtrochanteric pathological fractures
with its prolonged use. However, there has been increased reports of
Bisphosphonate Related Osteonecrosis of Jaw (BRONJ) in the last
decade. This case series highlights three patients with history of monthly
bisphosphonate use for treatment of osteoporosis and pathological
fracture, resulting in BRONJ with a very unfavorable outcome.
Case report: Initial presentation and chief complaints varied among the
patients, from a referral of osteoporotic patient on bisphosphonate for
BMD test to a patient on bisphosphonate treatment for pathological femur
fracture. The other was referred from orthopaedic clinic to dental clinic
for evaluation of loose tooth. She had an extraction of right mandibular
molar and noticed poor healing of socket without pain. Although the
presenting scenarios were different, all the patients were well on the path
of osteonecrosis of the jaw with poor outcomes.
Conclusion: As BRONJ is a fairly new entity in medical literature, its
incidence is low at 0.01-0.04% with oral bisphosphonates. BRONJ is
thought to be caused by trauma to dentoalveolar structures that have a
limited capacity for bone healing due to greater bone turnover in jaw
and this explains why there are greater bisphosphonate deposition in the
jaw vs. extra gnathic sites. The mechanism of injury is different for
atypical fracture secondary to prolonged use of bisphosphonate as it has
been suggested that prolonged suppression of bone turnover under long
term administration may impair ability of bone to remodel. This leads to
accumulation of microdamage and compromised bone strength ultimately
progressing to a stress fracture. Bisphosphonates are a crucial weapon in
our orthopaedic armory. Therefore, we should stress the importance of
obtaining comprehensive oral/dental examination, prophylaxis, and
treatment prior to starting bisphosphonate treatment in our clinic.
S371
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P783
SYMPTOMS OF MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS AND ITS
ASSOCIATION WITH PREVIOUS EXERCISE HABITS IN
POST COVID-19 PATIENTS
A. Kaur1, M. Mitra1, D. Wadhwa1
1MVP's College of Physiotherapy, Nashik, India
Objective: COVID-19 is a pandemic disease affecting a huge number of
people all over the world. Regardless of the variety of symptoms and
signs, recovered post covid patients complained of musculoskeletal
symptoms which have been ignored since its first identification. This
study aimed to find out the different types of the musculoskeletal
disorder symptoms experienced by post COVID-19 patients and to
explore the association among those symptoms and previous exercise
habits before getting infected with COVID-19.
Methods: A descriptive type of cross-sectional study was conducted
having 100 patients. Participants in study were selected using a purposive
sampling technique. Inclusion criteria: patients with a history of positive
COVID-19 test and received medical management prior to 4 weeks;
patients complained of musculoskeletal symptoms; age 30-60 y.
Exclusion criteria: positive COVID-19 test during study; age <30 and
>60. Data collection was done by using a structured questionnaire
comprised of demographic information, musculoskeletal related
symptoms and physical activity related information using face to face
interview. Statistical analysis was done using descriptive statistics by
frequency and percentages and association were made by using the chi-
square test and Karl Pearsons test.
Results: Among the 100 participants, 69 were male and 31 were female
with a mean age of 48.24 y. In the location of pain status, 63 complained
of pain in the head and neck, 18 in the upper limb, 45 in the lower limb
and 36 in the back. Besides, 80% of patients complained of global
weakness. A significant association was found between exercise before
COVID and severity of post COVID musculoskeletal complaints
(p<0.001)
Conclusion: Musculoskeletal symptoms are features of post COVID-19
syndrome and it is mainly believed to arise from the over-inflammatory
response due to marked elevation in creatine kinase and lactate
dehydrogenase levels. The patients who were regularly performing
exercise before COVID-19 infection developed less musculoskeletal
complaints compare to other sedentary post COVID patients.
P784
CASPASE-1 INHIBITION AFFECTS CD36 EXPRESSION AND
R A N K L / O P G
R A T I O
I N
D I F F E R E N T I A T I N G
CHONDROCYTES
A. Ramesova1, B. Vesela1, E. Svandova1, E. Matalova1
1Dept. of Physiology, University of Veterinary Sciences Brno, Brno,
Czech Republic
Objective: Caspases are cysteine proteases known particularly from
apoptosis and inflammation but with emerging essential functions also
beyond these processes, including chondrogenesis. General caspase
inhibition in differentiating chondrocytes pointed to modulation of the
fatty acid translocase Cd36. As a key candidate responsible for the effect
appears caspase-1 due to its roles in inflammation but also lipid
metabolism. Both molecules are considered to be involved in
inflammation-related pathologies including osteoarthritis. Notably,
engagement of fatty acids in bone homeostasis has been associated with
the expression of Rankl and Opg, components of the master regulatory
system in bone remodelling being present also in chondroblasts. The aim
of this study was to challenge chondrogenic micromass cultures by a
selective caspase-1 inhibitor to evaluate any modulations in Cd36
expression. Additionally, the expression of Rankl and Opg was followed.
Methods: The well established in vitro model of chondrogenesis, derived
from mouse embryonic front limbs, was used for the research purpose. A
pharmacological inhibitor of caspase-1 (Z-WEHD-FMK) was added to
the experimental group which was cultured for 7 d in parallel with control
micromasses. Samples were harvested, RNA isolated, cDNA prepared
and expression levels of Cd36, Rankl, and Opg quantified by qPCR.
Results: In the Z-WEHD-FMK treated group, expression of Cd36 was
significantly upregulated as well as expression of Opg, whereas Rankl
was downregulated. Immunocytofluorescence confirmed these
modulations on protein level. To determine if there is any association
between Cd36 and Rankl/Opg expressions, Cd36 was silenced in
micromass cultures. Cd36 silencing caused increased expression of
Rankl and decreased Opg expression, which are opposing trends to
caspase-1 inhibition (and Cd36 upregulation).
Conclusion: The presented results demonstrate novel functions of
caspase-1 in chondrocyte differentiation and pathways connected with
lipid metabolism through fatty acid transporter Cd36. The detected effect
of Cd36 on the Rankl/Opg ratio is important in relation to bone
remodelling and metabolism as well as pathologies such as osteoarthritis.
Acknowledgement: Research supported by the Czech Science
Foundation (GA CR 19-12023S).
P785
PARTICIPATION OF NEUTROPHIL EXTRACELLULAR
TRAPS IN AUTOIMMUNE RHEUMATIC DISEASES
A. Trofimenko1, M. Mamus1, S. Bedina1, E. Mozgovaya1, S. Spitsina1
1Research Institute of Clinical & Experimental Rheumatology A.B.
Zborovsky, Volgograd, Russia
Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are specific extracellular netlike
structures which consist of interlaced nuclear chromatine strands decorated
with various molecules of nuclear and cytoplasmatic origin, primarily
histones, neutrophilic elastase, cathepsin G, azurocidin, myeloperoxidase,
and peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (PAD4). NETs assembling process is
now commonly referred as NETosis. It can proceed either with cell death,
or in so called vital form, when the cells not only can be viable, but also
retain some effector functions. Generation of NETs can be initiated by
microorganisms, bacterial wall constituents, antibodies, cytokines, as well
as phorbol esthers in vitro. Principal role in NETosis performance is
attributed to ROS, especially NADPH oxidase and mitochondrial ROS
generation pathways. PAD4 is another critical NETosis enzyme, essential
for NET formation. Abundant citrullination of NETs constituents is a
mandatory property, which means appearance of citrullinated neoepitopes
accessible to immune system as a result of NETosis. NET formation is
therefore a phenomenon of particular interest in the search for initiating
antigen of anticitrulline autoantibodies in rheumatoid arthritis. Progression
of the disease has been demonstrated to be associated with NET markers
accumulation. Furthermore, fibroblasts from RA model were revealed to
ingest NETs and stimulate production of antibodies to citrullinated
histones. A number of NET-associated molecules, including modified
dsDNA and histones, are known to be leading autoantigens in systemic
lupus erythematosus. Preactivated low-density neutrophils from SLE
patients can easier reveal NETosis and outthrow more autoantigens.
Multiple studies regarding role of NETs in rheumatoid arthritis, systemic
lupus erythematosus, vasculitides, gout, and thrombotic conditions, are
under performance, and the information is continuously updated.
P786
BARRIERS AND EXPECTATIONS FOR PATIENTS IN
POSTOSTEOPOROTIC FRACTURES CARE IN FRANCE:
THE EFFEL STUDY
R. Launois1, E. Cabout1, D. Benamouzig2, L. Velpry3, K. Briot4, F.
Alliot5, L. Perrin6, L. Grange7, R. Sellami8, C. Touboul8, J.-M.
Joubert6, C. Roux4
1REES France, Paris, 2Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Science Po, Paris, 3Département de sociologie et d'anthropologie,
S372
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Université Paris 8, Paris, 4Service de Rhumathologie, Hôpital Cochin,
AP-HP, Paris, 5Association Française de Lutte Anti-Rhumatismale,
Paris, 6UCB Pharma, Colombes, 7Service de Rhumatologie, CHU
Grenoble-Alpes, Echirolles, 8Kantar Health, Gentilly, France
Objective: To quantify the relative importance of barriers to better
secondary prevention of osteoporotic fractures and of care expectations
expressed by patients with osteoporotic fractures in France. The aim of
this poster is to show how economic analysis techniques can be used to
quantify the relative value that the patient attaches to the difficulties and
facilities he/she has experienced in implementing a personal approach to
secondary prevention of osteoporosis.
Methods: A qualitative exploration of potential barriers to care and
expectations was undertaken through a systematic literature review and
in-depth patients interviews. A list of 21 barriers and 21 expectations were
identified. These were presented to 324 subjects with osteoporotic fracture,
identified in a representative sample of the French population, in the form
of best-worst scaling questionnaires. Patients rated the relative importance
of the attributes and arithmetic mean importance scores were calculated
and ranked. A Bayesian hierarchical model was also performed in order to
generate a relative importance score. Latent class analysis was performed
to identify potential subgroups of patients with different response profiles.
Results: Seven barriers were rated as the most important, relating to
awareness of osteoporosis and coordination of care. The highest-ranked
barrier, “my fracture is not related to osteoporosis”, was significantly
more important than all the others (mean importance score: 0.45
[95%CI: 0.33-0.56]. A similar ranking of attributes was obtained with
both the arithmetic and the Bayesian approach. For expectations, no clear
hierarchy of attributes was identified. Latent class analysis discriminated
three classes of respondents with significant differences in response
profiles (the educated environmentalists, the unaware, and the victims
of the system).
Conclusion: The use of quantitative and qualitative approaches in
combination provides a better understanding of research issues than either
approach alone. Better quality of care of osteoporosis and effective
secondary fracture prevention will require improvements in patient
education, training of healthcare professionals and coordination of care.
Further research for the sequential valuation of the patient’s experience in
the delivery of secondary osteoporosis prevention from the patients’
perspective is needed.
P787
M E T A B O L I C O S T E O A R T H R I T I S A N D L E P T I N :
RELATIONSHIPS IN PATIENTS WITH OBESITY THERAPY
E. A. Strebkova1, L. I. Alekseeva1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the relationships between leptin and the clinical
manifestations of OA and the components of the MS in the context of
obesity therapy.
Methods: 50 female (mean age 56.5±5.8 y) with Kellgren-Lawrence
stage II-III knee OA and obesity (BMI >30 kg/m²). 62% of pts were
diagnosed MS. Pts were divided into 2 groups. Group 1 (n=25) took
orlistat 120 mg 3 times/d for 6 months. Group 2 (n=25) had a hypocaloric
diet and exercise for 6 months. The clinical course of OA was determined
by the WOMAC and VAS. All pts underwent a laboratory examination: a
biochemical blood test, leptin was determined by PCR.
Results: High leptin levels (p<0.01) were determined in pts with more
than 3 MS components. The correlation analysis showed positive
correlations between leptin and WOMAC pain (r=0.36, p=0.02), and
VAS pain (r=0.51, p=0.01), and weight (r=0.56, p<0.01), and waist
circumference (r=0.38, p<0.01). Group 1 had a significant decrease of
body weight by 10.07% (p<0.05), the indicators of the WOMAC index
improved (p<0.05) after 6 months. Group 2 had a not significant decrease
of body weight by 0.84% (p>0.05), and worse indicators of clinical
manifestations of OA. 24% of pts from group 1 showed a decrease in
the number of MS components. Group 1 had a significant decrease of the
level of leptin (p=0.05). We found positive correlations between a
decrease of leptin and a decrease of the total WOMAC (p=0.01). Pts with
a decrease in the number of MS components had a significantly lower
leptin levels (p=0.01).
Conclusion: Leptin is a predictor of a worse course of the metabolic OA.
We observed a decrease in the level of leptin, in the number of MS
components, and an improvement in the clinical manifestations of OA
against the background of a significant decrease in body weight. Thus, the
treatment of obesity in pts with the metabolic OA and other interventions
aimed at reducing the level of leptin may contribute to reducing the
progression of knee OA.
P788
ADRENAL CUSHING SYNDROME AND BILATERAL
TUMOURS: BONE STATUS
A. Ghemigian1, C. Chirita2, N. Dumitru1, C. Tupea3, A. Dumitrascu3, E.
Petrova1, M. Popescu4
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, Bucharest, 2Medic Zone Centre, Bucharest,
3C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest,
4University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: A challenging situation in adrenal tumours field is related to
the presence of bilateral masses of similar dimensions with mild
autonomous cortisol secretion and cardiometabolic, respective high
osteoporotic fracture risk complications. The decision of adrenalectomy
is delicate because adrenal arteries catheterise is not available in many
centres while bilateral adrenalectomy, despite being feasible one time
during laparoscopic approach due to recent progress in surgery,
complicates the clinical picture with chronic adrenal insufficiency
requiring lifelong substitution (1-5).
Case report: This is a 64-year-old female, who was accidentally detected
in 2017 with bilateral adrenal tumours starting from a routine abdominal
ultrasound. She has a history of controlled arterial hypertension,
hyperlipemia, and a surgical removal of a mammary benign
fibroadenoma a decade ago. The initial computed tomography showed
a right adrenal tumour of 1.4x2 cm, and a left adrenal tumour of 2.2x1.6
cm. At that moment, a central DXA scan was also performed and a
lumbar T-score of -2.5SD confirmed osteoporosis; she was offered
denosumab every 6 months, and 3 y later she achieved a lumbar T-
score of -2.1 SD (without prevalent fragility fractures). The adrenal
hormonal profile was stationary: morning plasma cortisol of 19 μg/dL
(normal: 6-21 μg/dL) and after 1 mg dexamethasone suppression test of
2.43 μg/dL (normal <1.8 μg/dL), morning plasma ACTH of 4.8 pg/mL
(normal: 6-66 pg/mL), in addition to normal glucose profile, also 25-
hydroxyvitamin D (under daily 1000 UI), and suppressed bone turnover
markers. Adrenalectomy was postponed and she continued denosumab,
In 2020, MRI showed a right adrenal tumour of 1.8x1 cm, and a left
adrenal tumour of 2.2x1.8 cm and an additional tumour at the level of
the same gland of 1 cm. Low-normal ACTH was of 7 pg/mL (normal: 6-
66 pg/mL) in association with increased morning plasma cortisol of 744
nmol/L (normal: 66-327) and stationary BMD-DXA profile. Left
adrenalectomy was recommended, but the patient refused it.
Conclusion: This case highlights the fact that bone loss might be
expected in bilateral adenomas with potential cortisol overexpression,
even a clear correlation between endocrine features, adrenal imaging
and DXA, as gold standard in menopausal women for this particular
topic, is difficult to establish.
S373
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Maturitas 2009;62:98.
2.
Gheorghisan-Galateanu AA, et al. Acta Endocrinologica Bucharest
2017;3:356.
3.
Iorga AM, et al. Exp Ther Med 2020;20:2396.
4.
Poiana C, et al. Bone Res 2013;1:275.
5.
Sandru F, et al. Exp Ther Med 2020;20:3389.
P789
REHABILITATION PROGRAM IN A YOUNG PATIENT WITH
PRIMARY OSTEOPOROSIS AND SECONDARY ASEPTIC
NECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD
K. C. Kamal1, M. R. Traistaru1, D. O. Alexandru1, A. M. Kamal1, D. T.
Maria1, D. Kamal2
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, 2SAMA Medical
Center, Craiova, Romania
Objective: We present the case of a 32 years old woman that started
having severe pain, stiffness in her left hip and disability in gait 3 years
after she suffered a Garden III left femoral fracture, and was diagnosed
with severe primary osteoporosis.
Methods: Physical examination showed shortening of the left limb by 1.5
cm, severe pain and limited range of movement in left hip joint.
Weakness of the hip muscles was noted and the ability to stand and
balance on left lower limb was diminished. MRI of left femoral hip joint
revealed loss of sphericity, contour irregularities and flattening of the left
femoral head, highlighting a subchondral area in hyposignal T1, T2 and
STIR, located superior antero-externally, with dimensions of 3.4/1.5 cm,
surrounded by lysereum in hyposignal T1, T2, hyersignal STIR and
diffuse bone edema. BMD was measured by DXA and showed: L1–L4
BMD: 0.764 g/cm2; T-score −3.2; Z-score −3. The laboratory tests
revealed no abnormality.
Our patient was diagnosed with stage 2 secondary aseptic necrosis of the
femoral head. The patient refused pharmacological treatment for
osteoporosis, she received analgesics and followed a 6 months complex
rehabilitation program: posture (activity modification), physical therapy
(thermotherapy; electrotherapy TENS, laser, NMES), classic and special
massage (Cyriax), kinetic and occupational therapy. We assessed the pain
and functional status before and after the treatment using the visual
analogue scale (VAS), 6-min walk test, Timed Up and Go test, Harris
Hip Score and SF-36 scale, before and after the rehabilitation program.
Results VAS score was 8 before and 4 after the rehabilitation program; 6-
min walk was 170 m before and 260 m after; Timed Up and Go=39 s
before and 21 s after; Harris Hip Score was 34 before rehabilitation and
48 after, and the SF 36 score was 36 before rehabilitation and 50 after the
rehabilitation program.
Conclusion: Taking into account that trauma is the most common cause
of NACF, young patients should be monitored frequently, especially if
they suffer from other conditions such as osteoporosis.
P790
SPONDYLODISCITIS ASSOCIATED WITH LUMBAR DISC
HERNIATION IN A PATIENT WITH A HISTORY OF PENILE
CANCER
K. C. Kamal1, M. R. Traistaru1, D. O. Alexandru1, A. M. Kamal1, D. T.
Maria1, D. Kamal2
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, 2SAMA Medical
Center, Craiova, Romania
Objective: We present the case of a 75-year-old man with penile cancer
history (12 y ago), who had several episodes of low back pain (LBP), in
the last year, that improved at rest, and had in the last 3 weeks an intense
LBP that severely affected his functionality.
Methods: The physical examination showed dorsal kyphosis, lumbar
scoliosis, paravertebral muscle contracture, pain and increased
sensitivity in the lumbar spine and paravertebral muscles, significant
decrease in range of movement in the lumbar spine. Laboratory
assessments revealed no abnormality, other than the value of ESR that
was 37 mm/h, C-reactive protein value of 19 mg/L. Urine cultures
were positive for E. coli. MRI of the penis, inguinal and pelvic area
showed no abnormalities. Spine MRI with contrast administration
revealed median and paramedian L4-L5 disc herniation with imprint
on the dura mater; T2/STIR hyperintense and T1 hypointense signal
L4-L5 intervertebral disc and adjacent vertebral bodies, extended high
gadophilia in L4 and L5 vertebral bodies, L4-L5 disc and anterior and
posterior vertebral ligaments; L3-L4 and L5-S1 disc protrusions. As
the patient had difficulty urinating sometimes, he was referred to a
urologist who found that the patient was suffering from a mild urethral
stricture, for which he intervened noninvasively by gradually
enlarging the urinary meatus during several treatment sessions.
Results: 6 months after the end of the urological treatment, antibiotic
therapy for 12 weeks, bed rest and immobilization for 2 weeks, and then
ambulation using a brace and physical therapy, a new MRI of the spine
was performed and found a marked improvement of the previous imaging
aspect, with a significant reduction of contrast enhancement, aspects
correlated with the significant improvement of the patient's pain and
functional status, assessed by visual analogue scale for pain and Short
Form-36 Physical Functioning scale.
Conclusion: In this case the urethral stricture after the penile cancer
removal surgery was incriminated in developing spondylodiscitis but
sometimes an underlying malignancy can represent a risk factor as well.
Surveillance after a penile cancer diagnosis is life-long because these
patients have the potential to develop recurrent disease or a new primary
tumor.
P791
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN MTOR EXPRESSION AND
METABOLIC OSTEOARTHRITIS
E. A. Strebkova1, L. I. Alekseeva1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the relationships between mTOR expression and
the clinical manifestations of OA in pts with different BMI.
Methods: The study included 73 females with Kellgren-Lawrence stage
II-III knee OA. The pts were divided into 2 groups: group 1 (n=50) with
obesity (BMI >30 kg/m2) and group 2 (n=23) with normal or increased
body weight (BMI <30 kg/m2). The average age of pts with obesity is
56.5±5.87 y, without obesity 58.7±5.43 y. Clinical manifestations were
evaluated by a WOMAС. RNA was isolated from the pts' blood samples,
which was used to determine the expression of mTOR.
Results: OA develops at an earlier age in obese pts, than in nonobese pts
(p<0.001). Group 1 had a high BMI >30 kg/m2 at the onset of OA. Obese
pts had more severe knee OA is significantly more often detected: stage
III was determined in 10% of obese pts and in 4.35% without obesity
(p<0.001). Significantly higher values of the WOMAC index pain,
stiffness, joint functional failure, and total WOMAC were observed in
obese pts (p<0.05). Obese pts had higher VAS pain (p<0.05) compared to
pts with a lower BMI. Obese pts had a higher mTOR expression (p<0.05),
compared to non-obese pts. High mTOR expression was associated with
VAS knee pain (r=0.78; p<0.05) and WOMAC pain (r=0.89; p<0.05) in
obese pts.
S374
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Table. Correlation of mTOR.
Parameters
mTOR (1 group, n=50)
mTOR (2 group, n=23)
Body weight
р>0.05
р>0.05
Pain VAS
r=0.78; р<0.05
p=0.07; r=0.45
Pain WOMAC
r=0.89; р<0.05
р > 0.05
Total WOMAC
р > 0.05
р > 0.05
Conclusion: Our study showed that pts with obesity and knee OA
have higher rates of mTOR expression, compared to pts with normal
body weight. High mTOR expression correlates with the severity of
knee pain in obese pts. Thus, the evaluation of mTOR expression in
obese pts and knee OA plays an important role in predicting the
severity of clinical manifestations of OA, and may influence the
choice of personalized therapy tactics for such pts.
P792
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ECONOMIC BURDEN OF FRAGILITY
FRACTURES IN AUSTRIA
C. Muschitz1, M. Hummer2, J. Grillari3, A. Hlava2, A. Birner2, M.
Hemetsberger4, H. P. Dimai5
1St. Vincent Hospital, Medical Dept. II, Vienna, 2Austrian National
Public Health Institute, Vienna, 3Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for
Experimental & Clinical Traumatology at the AUVA Research Center,
Vienna, 4Hemetsberger Medical Services, Vienna, 5Medical University
of Graz, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology &
Diabetology, Graz, Austria
Objective: Fragility fractures are frequently associated with long
hospital stays, loss of independence and increased need for care in
the elderly, with consequences often leading to premature death.
The aim of this study was to estimate the number of fragility
fractures and associated healthcare costs in Austria in 2018.
Methods: The number of in-patients with relevant ICD-10 diagnoses
in all Austrian public hospitals was derived from discharge
documentation covering all public hospitals in Austria; out-patient
cases were estimated from trauma hospital data. Fractures resulting
from falls from standing height in patients aged ³50 years were used
as a proxy for fragility fractures. The direct costs of these cases
were calculated using the average cost of the corresponding in-
patient hospital stay and the average cost for the out-patient stay.
This study was approved by the ethics committee of the medical
university of Vienna.
Results: The estimated number of fragility fractures for 2018 was
92,835 cases, corresponding to a prevalence of 2600/100,000
inhabitants aged ≥50 y. A constant increase in the proportion of
fragility fractures among all fractures was observed with increasing
age in both, men and women (Figure). These fractures amounted to
direct costs of >157 million €.
Conclusion: Fragility fractures are a frequent and costly event in
Austria. Due to the ageing of the population, the number of fragility
fractures and their associated costs are expected to increase even
further.
Disclosures: Financial support: Amgen GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
MHe has received consulting fees from Amgen outside scope of
the present work and holds Amgen equity. JG is scientific advisor,
cofounder, and shareholder of TAmiRNA GmbH and Evercyte
GmbH.
P793
PATIENTS’ CHARACTERISTICS RELATED TO BONE
MINERAL DENSITY EVOLUTION AT DENOSUMAB
DISCONTINUATION: THE REOLAUS BONE PROJECT
G. Liebich1, E. Gonzalez Rodriguez2, O. Lamy3
1Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne,
2Interdisciplinary Center for Bone Diseases, Rheumatology Service,
Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne,
3Interdisciplinary Center for Bone Diseases, Rheumatology Service,
and Internal medicine Service, Medicine Dept., Lausanne University
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Objective: At denosumab discontinuation (DD) a relay by
bisphosphonates (BPs) is needed to prevent the loss of the BMD gained
under denosumab, and reduce the risk of spontaneous vertebral fractures.
This study aimed to compare patients loosing BMD after DD and those
with stable values.
Methods: Patients who received >2 injections and with a follow-up >1 y
after DD at Lausanne University Hospital were included. BMD in T-
scores was measured at DD, and 1 and 2 years after. BTMs were
measured regularly, and expressed in% of the upper limit of the norm
for premenopausal women. Losers (BMD loss >0.2 DS at lumbar spine
(LS)) were compared to Non-losers.
Results: 161 postmenopausal women stopped denosumab after 8.0±2.9
injections: age 65.8±9.5 y, BMI 23.3±3.5, 47.8% had previous fractures,
19.0% were exposed to anti-aromatase. 38.5% received BPs before
denosumab and 94.4% after DD. During the first year after DD patients
lost LS BMD (mean ΔT-score: -0.25±0.39 SD), while it stabilized on the
second year (ΔT-score 0.03±0.41 SD). During the first year after DD,
54.3% of patients were defined as Losers at LS (mean ΔT-score: -0.50
S375
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
±0.24 SD), while 45.7% were Non-losers (ΔT-score 0.05±0.30 SD).
Losers had a longer denosumab treatment, 9.08±2.55 vs. 7.55±2.60
injections (p<0.01), and shorter BPs treatment before it (40.5±22.6 vs.
65.9±50.6 months, p=0.05). During the first year, β-CrossLaps (CTX)
were higher in Losers vs. Non-losers (AUC: 80.2±41.4% vs. 57.9
±31.1%, p<0.01; highest reached value: 119.7±55.7% vs. 93.5±52.3%,
p<0.01), and negatively correlated with LS BMD evolution (p<0.01).
More Losers needed ≥3 zoledronate perfusions to control the rebound
(41% vs. 10% of Non-losers; p<0.01). We obtained similar results on
the whole 2 y of follow-up.
Conclusion: Shorter BPs treatment before denosumab, longer
denosumab treatment, and higher post-denosumab CTX levels predict a
greater loss of BMD on the two years following denosumab
discontinuation.
P794
SEASONAL DIFFERENCES IN VITAMIN D LEVELS IN
MEXICAN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
D. Lopez-Gonzalez1, D. Montiel-Ojeda1, L. Mendez-Sanchez1, M.
Guagnelli2, P. Clark1
1Hospital Infantil de Mexico Federico Gomez, 2Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: Seasonal serum vitamin D (VD) level variability is a relatively
well-described phenomenon. This means that for people living in greater
latitudes, VD levels during summer tend to be higher than during winter.
This phenomenon impacts VD deficiency reported in diverse
populations. In contrast, seasonal variation tends to be milder or even
nonexistent in populations located closer to the equator, where it is
generally assumed that sun exposure is sufficient to prevent this
deficiency. In Mexico, VD deficiency prevalence described in children
goes from 10% to 20%. However, no seasonal variation has been
reported. This study aimed to establish the seasonal differences in VD
levels in Mexican 5-20 y.
Methods: Cross-sectional study, in a subsample of healthy subjects aged
5-20 y, from schools in Mexico City. The included subjects were
evaluated during the period from fall 2016 to winter 2017. Subjects that
fulfilled inclusion criteria were scheduled for assessment including
pediatric, nutritional assessment and blood samples. Serum
concentrations of vitamin D were measured through chemiluminescence
assay by using the Liaison 25-hydroxyvitamin D total assay. We used
descriptive statistics for demographic data. Then we looked for
differences between groups by student T-test adjusted for multiple
comparisons. We also explored the association of other variables like
age and gender with the VD levels.
Results: We studied 816 subjects. The VD <20 mg/dl frequency was
42% (n=442). According with their BMI category 66% of the subjects
had normal weight, 17% overweight and 13% obesity. The mean VD
levels were lower during winter 2017 (17.04±5.1 mg/dL) in comparison
with the other seasons (p<0.05). The risk of VD levels <20 ng/mL during
winter in comparison with the other seasons was 2.9 (95%CI 2.2 to 3.9,
P<0.001). This risk was similar in the multiple logistic model (β=2.8,
95%CI 2.05 to 3.8, P<0.001), adjusted for other variables as age, sex,
BMI Z-score, milk consumption, physical activity and sedentarism.
Conclusion: In Mexican children the VD deficiency was 42%, there was
a lower level of VD during winter in comparison with the other season,
other risk factor associated was age, sex (female) and higher BMI.
P795
68 GA-DOTATATE FOR TUMOR LOCALIZATION IN TUMOR-
INDUCED OSTEOMALACIA
M. B. Zanchetta1, M. Bastianello2, M. Chirico3, A. De Salazar3, M.
Cimin3, C. Balonga1, G. Mumbach4, Y. Mocarbel5, A. Pignatta6, J. M.
Roganovich7, J. R. Zanchetta1
1IDIM, Universidad del Salvador, Buenos Aires, 2Cemic, Hospital
Universitario, Buenos Aires, Argentina, Buenos Aires, 3Cemic,
Hospital Universitario, Buenos Aires, 4Instituto de Ortopedia y
Traumatología, Posadas, Misiones, 5Division de Endocrinología,
Hospital de Clinicas, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
6Servicio de Endocrinología, Hospital Interzonal, San Juan Bautista,
San fernando del valle de Catamarca, 7Clinica Ambar, Posadas,
Argentina
Objective: Tumor-induced Osteomalacia (TIO), whose surgical resection
is curative, represents a diagnostic challenge. Anatomical identification is
generally not viable both for conventional methods and for traditional
metabolic markers such as FDG PET. Therefore, we explore the utility
of 68Ga DOTATATE positron emission tomography (PET)/computed
tomography (CT) for localization of TIO.
Methods: Between December 2019 and March 2021, PET CT studies
with 68Ga DOTATATE were performed in 5 TIO patients aged between
42-67 y who had several previous inconclusive conventional
morphometabolic studies.
Results: In all patients the presence of a nodular soft tissue lesion was
detected with intense avidity for uptake by the radiotracer, obtaining SUV
max values between 8.3-19.8. These lesions were located in the head and
neck (n=3) and in the appendicular system (n=2). Four (80%) of the
lesions presented bone involvement of the adjacent structures and all with
the uncharacteristic enhancement of the intravenous contrast. At the time
of this work, 2 of the 5 patients underwent surgery, both presenting
histological confirmation of the resected lesion.
Conclusion: As previously described in the literature, according to our
series of cases, 68Ga DOTATATE could be the tool of choice for the
S376
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
detection and topographic localization of mesenchymal tumors producing
TIO. This new possibility brings hope to patients and families with this
condition that causes a catastrophic impact on quality of life.
Disclosure: This study was funded by Ultragenyx as an Investigator
Sponsored Trial.
Figure 1. Mastoid cells on the right side without the corresponding
pneumatization, showing occupancy by tissue of intermediate
hypercaptant density that reaches SUV max 9.4.
P796
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LATERAL AND ANTERIOR-
POSTERIOR DEVELOPMENT OF THE HUMAN FIBULA AS
A FUNCTION OF ACTIVITY LEVEL AND USE OF THE
FOOT: A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY
L. Pisani1, N. Pilot1, S. Luscher2, L. Mackler2, J. Rittweger3, A. Ireland4,
J. L. Ferretti2, G. Cointry2, R. Capozza2
1Unidad de Estudios Biomecánicos Osteomusculares, Universidad del
Gran Rosario, Argentina, Rosario, Argentina, 2Centro de Estudios de
Metabolismo Fosfo-Cálcico, Rosario, Argentina, 3German Aerospace
Center, Cologne, Germany, 4Manchester Metropolitan University,
Manchester, UK
Objective: To evaluate the lateral (L) and anterior-posterior (AP)
structural stiffness of the fibula in men subjected to different regimes of
physical activity with different use of the foot.
Methods: Crude or cortical-area adjusted cross-sectional moments of
inertia for L (LMI) and AP bending (APMI) and the corresponding
Bone Strength Indices (LBSI, APBSI) of the whole fibulae (pQCT, 18
scans/bone at 5% bone length increments) and the maximal
dynamometric force of foot rotation/eversion and one-leg jump (Ff, Fj)
were determined in groups of 18-30 y healthy males who were untrained
sedentary (SC, 15), moderately active (AC, 15), runners (Run, 15), soccer
players (Soc, 30) and rugby players (Rug, 15), and in 10 males with spinal
cord injury (SCI) and 9 anthropometrically-paired, active controls (sciC).
Results: Along a wide range of bone sites, all LMI and LBSI values were
significantly higher in Rug and Soc and lower in Run and SC than in AC
(BSI: +412%, +12%, -18%, -24%). All APMI and APBSI values were
significantly higher in Rug, similar in Run and lower in SC compared
with AC (BSI: +47%, +14%, +1%(ns), -9%). The LMI/APMI ratio (´
shape index’) increased in the order: SC -32% < Run -28% < Soc -7%
< Rug +3% and was lower in SCI than in sciC (-25%, p<0.01). Both LMI
and LBSI correlated more closely with Ff than with Fj (p<0.001, p<0.05),
with Ff increasing in the order SC<Run<Soc<Rug.
Conclusion: The progressive values of the L-related (not AP-related)
indicators and shape index suggest that the development of fibula
stiffening was stimulated in Soc and Rug (which train foot rotation/
eversion) but strikingly unaffected or even impaired in Run (which do
not) with respect to AC, in consonance with results in SC and SCI and
with the lower-left shift of their data in the correlation graphs with Ff.
This foot-related behavior of the fibula associated with specific muscle
strength points out the high relevance of directionality in the mechanical
control of bone structure.
P797
OSTEOPOROSIS IN MIDDLE-AGED WOMEN: WHAT IS THE
IMPACT OF MULTIMORBIDITY AND MEDICATION USE? A
CROSS-SECTIONAL POPULATION-BASED STUDY
A. V. Gueldini de Moraes1, L. H. Costa-Paiva1, A. O. Pedro1
1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil
Objective: Osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease influenced by many
clinical factors. Some of these factors are nonmodifiable, while others can
be avoided, ameliorated and prevented. From the perspective of the
middle-aged women and their physician, this is of importance since
longevity and aging process is associated to chronic conditions,
medication use and multimorbidity that may affect bone health. Many
of these chronic diseases may affect women during the menopause
transition. Therefore, it is important to know which medications are most
used by middle-aged women and which ones can potentially have adverse
skeletal effects. This study aimed to evaluate the association between self-
reported osteoporosis and multimorbidity and medication use, in
Brazilian middle-aged women.
Methods: A secondary analysis of household survey data from a
previous cross-sectional, population-based study conducted with a
sample of 749 women of a population of 257,434 female urban residents
in the age bracket of interest (45-60 y). Associations between selfreported
osteoporosis and chronic diseases, multimorbidity, and medication use
were evaluated. Simple and multiple Poisson regression analyses (with a
forward stepwise selection of variables) were performed to evaluate the
significance of the factors associated with selfreported osteoporosis
(95%CI for the prevalence ratio). The level of statistical significance
was set at 5%.
Results: Mean age of participants was 52.5±4.4 y. Mean age at
menopause was 46.5±5.8 y. About 79% of women reported having some
kind of chronic disease. The most prevalent morbidities were
hypertension (36%), depression (34%), anxiety (27%), osteoarticular
diseases (27%), dyslipidemia (22%), asthma (10.5%), and diabetes
S377
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
mellitus (10.4%). Only 21.6% denied having morbidities. The prevalence
of self-reported osteoporosis was 7.3%. Among those women with
osteoporosis, 67.3% reported using specific drugs to treat bone loss.
The specific intake of drugs for osteoporosis treatment correspond to
7.6% of the overall prevalence of medication use. Only 6% of the entire
studied population reported using calcium and vitamin D
supplementation. The overall prevalence of medication use was 68.8%,
with the drugs predominantly consisting of those used for cardiovascular
diseases (34.6%), oral lipid-lowering agents (13%), anxiolytics (12%),
treatment of osteoarticular diseases (12%), and treatment of diabetes
(9.6%). Only 19.5% of the participants reported previous or current use
of hormone replacement therapy. The overall frequency of polypharmacy
was 23%. After multiple regression analysis, the main factors associated
with selfreported osteoporosis were having osteoarthrosis/osteoarthritis
(PR=2.86; 95%CI: 1.58-5.17; p≤0.001), multimorbidity (PR=2.61;
95%CI: 1.43-4.75; p=0.002), and treatment for ischemic heart disease
(PR=3.28; 95%CI: 1.02-10.56; p=0.046). Strength & limitations: This
observational study provides an epidemiological contribution. The
meticulous methodology and the representativeness of the population
sample permit these conclusions to be extrapolated to the entire
population of middle-aged women residing in the metropolitan region
of Campinas, Brazil. Some limitations of this study must be considered,
particularly bearing in mind that much of the data was selfreported, which
may lead to biases.
Conclusion: The prevalence of morbidities and medication use among
middle-aged women was high in a relatively young population.
Osteoporosis was reported by approximately 8% of women, highlighting
the importance of menopause transition. However, only 2/3 of the
osteoporotic women reported using specific drugs for its treatment.
Furthermore, it was observed a low prevalence of calcium and vitamin
D supplementation. Women with selfreported osteoporosis were more
likely to use medicine for ischemic heart disease, to have osteoarticular
disease, besides having multimorbidity. Our findings reinforce the need
to address women earlier, preferably in the period before the menopausal
transition, to promote health through lifestyle modifications, thus
preventing the onset of chronic degenerative diseases at earlier ages.
Furthermore, clinicians should be aware to select drugs for the treatment
of chronic conditions in this specific group of women, considering the
potential side effects on bone health.
Acknowledgement: São Paulo Research Foundation - FAPESP
2016/08089-9.
P798
RESULTS OF THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN ULTRASOUND
THERAPY AND PHYSICAL EXERCISE PROGRAM IN KNEE
OSTEOARTHRITIS
I.-R. Marcu1, A.-M. Bumbea1, V. D. Caimac1, C. O. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Ultrasound therapy is chosen as a thermal agent for knee
osteoarthritis because it penetrates selectively into deep structures,
increasing their mobility, reducing muscular spasm and decreasing pain.
The aim of this study is to show the effect of association between
ultrasound therapy and kinetic program for reducing pain, stiffness and
improving knee motion.
Methods: We conducted a prospective randomized study that included
52 patients with knee osteoarthritis, randomly assigned in two groups: the
study group formed of 26 patients treated with ultrasound therapy and
kinetic program (group 1) and the control group (26 patients) that
followed an exercise program, without ultrasound therapy. The
assessment was made at the beginning of the study and after 14 d of
therapy using the next parameters: pain evaluated on a visual analogue
scale (VAS), 6-min walking distance test (6MWD), WOMAC.
Results: In group 2 (with physical exercise treatment), the pain in the
knee was reduced from 70.2 to 51.4 mm on VAS scale. The 6MWD test
recorded an average improvement of 15.6 m. The WOMAC scale
recorded a score drop from 74.2 to 41.4. Group 1, with kinetic program
and ultrasound therapy, presented better results: the VAS scale improved
from 71.3 to 34.5, the 6MWD test proved a growth in the walking
capacity with 23.4 meters, the WOMAC scale recorded a significant drop,
from 78.4 to 32.3. The results showed a better improvement in the study
group compared to the control group and were statistically significant
(p<0.05).
Conclusion: The patients with knee osteoarthritis showed improvement
of all the tested parameters, in the general group, but in the group with
exercise program combined with ultrasound therapy the results were
better. We concluded that combination of ultrasound therapy and kinetic
program is more effective compared to single use of physical exercise in
patients with knee osteoarthritis.
P799
SINGLE VERTEBRA BMD VALUES IN DIAGNOSIS OF
OSTEOPOROSIS AND PREDICTION OF COMPRESSION
FRACTURES
W. P. Chan1, Y.-C. Lu2, W.-C. Huang3, C. Poon-Ung4
1Dept. of Radiology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University,
Dept. of Radiology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, 2Dept. of Radiology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei
Medical University, 3Dept. of Computer Science and Information
Engineering, National Taiwan University, 4Dept. of Radiology, Taiwan
Adventist Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
Objective: For diagnosing osteoporosis, the ISCD official position on
spine region of interest suggests that BMD based diagnostic classification
should not be made using a single vertebra. The guidelines do not
mention whether only a single vertebra is still effective in diagnosing
osteoporosis or predicting vertebral compression fractures (VCFs). This
study aims to compare the ISCD rule with single vertebra method in
diagnosing osteoporosis or predicting VCFs.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated 14285 consecutive cases (5236
men over aged 50 and 9049 postmenopausal women) with DXA exams at
a single institution from 2007-2020; 2939 cases (female 2089) had more
than two follow-up exams. Of these 2939, 385 patients (13.1%; 82 males,
303 females) had newly developed vertebral fractures in follow-up
exams.
Results: The inconsistency between the two diagnostic methods was
17.3% (p<0.001). In baseline studies, 1270 patients (1071 females) with
low bone mass were reclassified as osteoporosis. In follow-up
examinations, there was significant difference between the ISCD rule
and the single vertebra method in diagnosing osteoporosis (p<0.001). In
385 cases with VCFs, in men, there was more osteoporosis with use of the
single vertebra method (26.8%) than that of the ISCD rule (8.5%); similar
results were found in women (51.2% vs. 24.8%, respectively). These two
methods offered different ability to distinguish with or without VCFs
(p<0.001). In men, sensitivity in prediction of VCFs was 0.09 (ISCD
rule) vs. 0.27 (single vertebra method), specificity 0.96 vs. 0.89, positive
predictive value 0.18 vs. 0.21, and negative predictive value was 0.91 vs.
0.92, respectively; whereas in women, sensitivity were 0.25 (ISCD rule)
vs. 0.51, specificity 0.90 vs. 0.71, positive predictive value 0.29 vs. 0.23,
and negative predictive value was 0.88 vs. 0.90, respectively.
Conclusion: Single vertebra method offers simple rule in analysis spine
BMD T-score and detects more osteoporosis than that of ISCD rule,
thereby providing early intervention on osteoporosis management to
patients and potentially reduce VCFs if these patients would have been
treated in our cohort. Our findings demonstrate less specificity in
predicting VCF, especially in females, using single vertebral method in
our originally untreated non-osteoporotic population in Taiwan.
S378
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P800
TOLERANCE OF INJECTABLE BISPHOSPHONATES IN THE
TREATMENT OF MALIGNANT OSTEOLYSIS
S. Miladi1, A. Fazaa1, L. Souebni1, W. Belhaj1, M. Sellami1, K.
Ouennich1, S. Kassab1, S. Chekili1, K. Ben Abdelghani1, A. Laatar1
1Rheumatology Dept., Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: Injectable bisphosphonates (BP) have a great contribution in
the treatment of malignant osteolysis. The aim of this work was to
evaluate the short- and long-term tolerance of these drugs.
Methods: A retrospective study has been conducted over a 12-y period
[2000-2012] at the rheumatology department of Mongi Slim Hospital. 57
patients followed for malignant osteolysis and treated with injectable BP
were integrated into this study. Tolerance was judged by the occurrence
of side effects.
Results: In the studied population, there were 16 women and 41 men
with an average age of 64 y. 19 patients were followed for multiple
myeloma while 38 patients were followed for bone metastasis. The most
commonly used injectable BP was zoledronate: 45 patients were treated
by zoledronate and 15 patients by pamidronate. In the pretherapy blood
test, hypocalcemia was reported in 5 cases and renal failure in 7 cases.
The stomatological examination was performed in half of the cases and
did not disapprove injected BP. The average number of cures per patient
was 9. As immediate adverse effects, after the first infusion, flu-like
syndrome appeared in 9 cases (3 on pamidronate and 6 on zoledronate)
and febrile mental confusion in 1 case (zoledronate) which regressed
spontaneously. Hypocalcemia (up to 1.57 mmol/L) has been reported in
14 cases (3 on pamidronate and 11 on zoledronate) and persisted in half of
the cases. A decrease in creatinine clearance of 20 mL/min has been noted
in one case and was not attributed to other treatment or disease activity.
Anterior uveitis has been diagnosed after the second cure of zoledronate
in one patient. Bone side effects including osteonecrosis of the jaw
(following the fourth cure of zoledronate) and pathological fractures have
been reported in two patients. The average follow-up in our study was 13
months. The reason for stopping BP was its adverse effects in 4 cases and
fatal progression of the underlying disease in 9 cases. Meanwhile, half of
the patients were lost of sight.
Conclusion: BP seem to be well tolerated however our weak follow-up
and the large number of patients lost of sight do not allow us to have
definitive conclusions. A pretherapeutic assessment as well as a rigorous
follow-up are necessary in order to improve the safety profile of these
products.
P801
A NEW ELASTIC BAND STRENGTH TEST FOR CORE
STABILITY MUSCLES IN PEOPLE WITH CHRONIC LOW
BACK PAIN
F. Franco-Lopez1, M. D. M. Muñoz Gomez2, A. Buendía-Romero1, J.
Diaz-Moron3, J. Courel-Ibáñez4
1Sport Science Faculty, Murcia University, Murcia, 2Rheumatology
Dept., Hospital Torrecárdenas, Almeria, 3QuironSalud Hospital,
Murcia, 4Physical Activity and Sports Dept., Sports Sciences Faculty,
Murcia University, Murcia, Spain
Objective: To identify the test-retest reliability of a submaximal rowing
strength test using elastic bands to evaluate the CORE stability muscles
force in people with chronic low back pain who underwent or not a
surgery process (arthrodesis and discectomy).
Methods: 18 people (age 50±13 y; weight 81.8±11.2 kg; 44.4% women)
with chronic low back pain and unfamiliar with the test completed two
testing sessions in two separate days (48-72 h between). Participants
performed two unilateral elastic band exercises (Rowing and Palov’s
press) with dominant and non-dominant hands. Force (N) was monitored
in real time using a portable sensor anchored to the wall. The test
consisted of a 5-s unilateral sustained contraction. Participants increased
the load progressively until moderate muscular failure was noticed (i.e.,
loss of >10 N within the last 3 s). The best record was considered for the
analysis. Reliability was examined by computing standard error of
measurement (SEM), coefficient of variation (CV%) and intraclass
correlation coefficient (ICC).
Results: The tests were highly reliable with low errors and high
correlation coefficients, both with dominant hands (rowing: SEM=18.8
N, CV=12.0%, ICC > 0.901; Palov’s press: SEM=12.9, CV=8.4%,
ICC=0.960) and non-dominant hands (rowing: SEM=14.0 N,
CV=8.8%, ICC=0.947; Palov’s press: SEM=18.8, CV=12.2%,
ICC=0.961). No discomfort or pain was reported during or after the tests.
Conclusion: A new, easy to implement and reliable test is provided to
evaluate the strength of CORE stability muscles in people with low back
pain using elastic bands. Coaches and practitioners may benefit from this
practical tool both to evaluate the strength and to design tailored exercise
prescriptions for people with chronic low back pain who underwent or not
a surgery process.
P802
KNOWLEDGE, ATTITUDES AND PRACTICES OF
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN REGARDING VITAMIN D
AND OSTEOPOROSIS
Y. Bastos-Silva1, A. O. Pedro1, L. Aguiar1, L. F. Baccaro1, L. H. Costa-
Paiva1
1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil
Objective: Vitamin D has a direct influence on musculoskeletal health,
and vitamin D deficiency is related to lower bone density and greater
bone resorption and to a higher incidence of fractures. To assess
knowledge, attitudes and practices regarding vitamin D and osteoporosis
in postmenopausal women.
Methods: This was a cross-sectional study carried out with 260
postmenopausal women who underwent routine consultations at the
menopause outpatient clinic of Campinas State University-São Paulo.
Women aged 50 y or older with amenorrhea for at least 12 months were
included. From an interview, sociodemographic information and health
data were collected, and knowledge about vitamin D, habits related to
vitamin D, and knowledge about osteoporosis were evaluated using the
Facts on Osteoporosis Quiz (FOOQ) questionnaire.
Results: A total of 67.31% of women answered less than half of the
questions about knowledge of vitamin D, 58.85% performed their day-
to-day activities mostly outdoors, and 53.85% said they did not expose
themselves sufficiently to the sun in their daily lives. The average
knowledge score on the FOOQ was 15.83 (±3.75). The variables
education level, number of correct FOOQ answers and total self-care
score were associated with the highest score for knowledge of vitamin D.
Conclusion: Knowledge about vitamin D and osteoporosis in this group
of postmenopausal women was limited. High levels of education,
knowledge about osteoporosis and selfcare were factors associated with
knowledge about vitamin D.
P803
POTENTIAL ROLE OF RADIOFREQUENCY ECHOGRAPHIC
MULTISPECTROMETRY TO ASSESS BONE STATUS IN
WOMEN WITH LUMBAR SPINE OSTEOARTHRITIS
C. Caffarelli1, M. D. Tomai Pitinca1, A. Al Refaie1, M. De Vita1, S.
Catapano1, F. Tramonte1, S. Gonnelli1
1Dept. of Medicine, Surgery and Neuroscience, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy
Objective: BMD measured by DXA represents the gold standard for
osteoporosis diagnosis. However, osteoarthritis lesions lead to an
overestimation of spine BMD and explain part of the discrepancies in
S379
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
BMD results. Recently, an innovative echographic approach for
osteoporosis diagnosis, defined as radiofrequency echographic
multispectrometry (REMS), has been introduced and clinically validated.
This new technology could represent an innovative diagnostic tool which
seems to be able to investigate bone quality and to provide an estimation
of fracture risk independently of BMD by the analysis of bone
microarchitecture. This study aimed to evaluate whether the use of the
REMS technique may improve the identification of osteoporosis in
subjects with osteoarthritis at lumbar spine.
Methods: In a cohort of 110 consecutive postmenopausal (63.2±11.3 y)
women with lumbar osteoarthritis we measured BMD at the lumbar
spine, at femoral neck and total hip using a DXA device; In all women,
an echographic scan of the same anatomical sites was performed with the
REMS technique was also carried out. The presence of lumbar
osteoarthritis was evaluated on baseline radiographs by using Kellgren-
Lawrence classification.
Results: The mean values of BMD at different skeletal sites, expressed as
T-score, obtained by DXA and REMS technique showed that BMD T-
score by REMS were significantly lower than those obtained by DXA
technique both at lumbar spine (p<0.01) and at all femoral subregions
(p<0.05). Moreover, the percentage of women classified as
“osteoporotic”, on the basis of BMD by REMS was markedly higher with
respect to those classified by DXA (35.1% vs. 9.3%, respectively). On the
contrary, the percentage of women classified as osteopenic or normal by
DXA was higher with respect to that by REMS (67.4% and 23.3% vs.
60.4% and 4.5%, respectively).
Conclusion: Our study shows that lumbar spine osteoarthritis, a common
finding in postmenopausal women, affects the results of spine BMD
leading to its overestimation. REMS technology by the analysis of native
raw unfiltered ultrasound signals appears to be able to recognize and
overcome the most common artifacts, such as osteoarthritis, which affect
the value of the BMD by DXA.
P804
A SURROGATE FRAX MODEL FOR ETHIOPIA
H. Johansson1, S. Hailu2, E. Liu1, M. Lorentzon1, L. Vandenput1, N. C.
Harvey3, E. V. McCloskey4, J. A. Kanis1
1Mary McKillop Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic
University, Melbourne, Australia, 2Black Lion Specialized Hospital,
Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 3MRC Lifecourse
Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK,
4Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK
Objective: FRAX models are frequently requested for countries with
little or no data on the incidence of hip fracture. In such circumstances,
the International Society for Clinical Densitometry and International
Osteoporosis Foundation have recommended the development of a
surrogate FRAX model, based on country-specific mortality data but
using fracture data from a country, usually within the region, where
fracture rates are considered to be representative of the index country.
This abstract describes the development and characteristics of a surrogate
FRAX model for Ethiopia.
Methods: The FRAX model used the ethnic-specific incidence of hip
fracture in coloured men and women living in South Africa, combined
with the death risk for Ethiopia.
Results: The surrogate model gave somewhat lower 10-y fracture
probabilities for men and women at all older ages compared to the model
for coloured from South Africa, reflecting a higher mortality risk in
Ethiopia. There were very close correlations in fracture probabilities
between the surrogate and authentic models (r>0.998) so that the use of
the Ethiopia model had little impact on the rank order of risk. It was
estimated that 10,862 hip fractures arose in 2015 in individuals over the
age of 50 y in Ethiopia, with a predicted increase by almost 4 times to
41,962 in 2050.
Conclusion: The surrogate FRAX model for Ethiopia provides an
opportunity to determine fracture probability within the Ethiopia
population and help guide decisions about treatment.
P805
SELF-CARE AGENCY AND ASSOCIATED FACTORS IN
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
Y. Bastos-Silva1, L. H. Costa-Paiva1, A. O. Pedro1, L. Aguiar1, P.
Pacello1, L. F. Baccaro1
1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil
Objective: The ageing process in women is marked by several changes,
including the transition to menopause. The evaluation of self-care
management is essential and has great relevance for public health. The
aim of the present study was to evaluate self-care management and
associated factors in postmenopausal women.
Methods: This study was a cross-sectional study performed with 260
postmenopausal women who attended routine consultations at the
Menopause Outpatient Clinic of the Hospital of the State University of
Campinas-SP. Women aged 50 years or older with amenorrhea for at least
12 months were included. The women were interviewed by a researcher
during the routine consultation, and the self-care agency assessment was
performed using the Appraisal of Self-Care Agency Scale-Revised
(ASAS-R) questionnaire.
Results: The average total self-care score for the women in this study was
62.27 (±9.64). Higher ASAS-R scores were associated with performing
outdoor activities, better self-perceived health, and a higher score on
knowledge about vitamin D. Active smoking was associated with a lower
self-care score.
Conclusion: We observed that the self-care management of
postmenopausal women was satisfactory and was associated with
lifestyle, self-perceived health, and knowledge about vitamin D.
P806
R A D I O F R E Q U E N C Y
E C H O G R A P H I C
MULTISPECTROMETRY AS A NONINVASIVE AND
COMPLEMENTARY TOOL FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
DIAGNOSIS IN ELDERLY WOMEN WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES
M. D. Tomai Pitinca1, C. Caffarelli1, A. Al Refaie1, M. De Vita1, S.
Catapano1, F. Tramonte1, S. Gonnelli1
1Dept. of Medicine, Surgery and Neuroscience, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy
Objective: Patients with diabetes mellitus (T2DM) present higher BMD
values from DXA compared with nondiabetic subjects. This paradox could
be explained by the fact that BMD, even if it represents a major determinant
of bone strength, does not take into account other factors which influence
bone strength. Recently, an innovative echographic approach for
osteoporosis diagnosis, defined as radiofrequency echographic
multispectrometry (REMS), has been introduced and clinically validated.
This study aimed to evaluate whether the use of the REMS technique may
improve the identification of osteoporosis in T2DM patients.
Methods: In a cohort of 90 consecutive postmenopausal elderly (70.5±7.6
y) womenwithT2DMandin90healthyage-matchedcontrolswemeasured
BMD at the lumbar spine (LS-BMD), at femoral neck (FN-BMD) and total
hip (TH-BMD) using a DXA device; In all women, an echographic scan
of the same anatomical sites was performed with the REMS technique.
Results: DXA measurements were all higher in T2DM than in non-T2DM
women; instead, all REMS measurements were lower in T2DM than in
non-T2DM women. Moreover, the percentage of T2DM women classified
as “osteoporotic”, on the basis of BMD by REMS was markedly higher
with respect to those classified by DXA (47.0% vs. 28.0%, respectively).
On the contrary, the percentage of T2DM women classified as osteopenic
or normal by DXA was higher with respect to that by REMS (48.8% and
S380
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
23.2% vs. 38.6% and 14.5%, respectively). T2DM women with fragility
fractures presented lower values of both BMD-LS by DXA and BMD-LS
by REMS with respect to those without fractures; however, the difference
was significant only for BMD-LS by REMS (p<0.05).
Conclusion: BMD by DXA values, as expected, were higher in women
with T2DM than in controls, whereas REMS-estimated BMD values
were lower in women with T2DM than in controls. Therefore, our data
suggest that REMS-estimated BMD could be a good diagnostic tool in
demonstrating the diabetes-associated bone disease and that REMS
technology may represent a useful approach to enhance the diagnosis of
osteoporosis in patients with T2DM.
P807
FIBRODYSPLASIA OSSIFICANS PROGRESSIVA: CASE
REPORT OF A TERMINAL PATIENT
M. D. M. Munoz-Gomez1
1Rheumatology Dept., Hospital Torrecárdenas, Almeria, Almería, Spain
The patient was a 29-year-old woman, with a history of type 1A diabetes and
primary amenorrhea secondary to cervical agenesis. At the age of 10 y, she
was examined because she had developed a tumor in the cervical region, with
no previous injury; she underwent a radiological study and bone biopsy that
was compatible with myositis ossificans. Over the years, large ectopic
ossificationsdevelopedinhershoulders,hips,knees, anklesandparavertebral
muscles, which produced a marked secondary thoracolumbar scoliosis and a
considerably generalized functional limitation. A plain radiology study of the
affected areas showed the existence of exuberant bone bridges at different
stages of maturation, that provoked the locking and ankylosing of a number
of joints, including a knee (Fig. 1), the spine and a shoulder. The patient was
treated with bisphosphonates and calcium supplements with vitamin D
for 5 y, while she was also being followed by the rehabilitation service;
however, none of these measures was capable of arresting the course of
the disease, which led to the physical disability of the patient.
Fig.1.Radiographofleftkneeshowingankylosissecondarytobonebridges
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva is a rare disease of unknown origin
that is characterized by a progressive heterotopic ossification of the
muscles and other structures in which connective tissue is abundant1. In
recent years, there has been an advance in our knowledge of the
etiological and pathogenic mechanisms of this disorder, which implicates
the receptor of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), the so called activin
A type I receptor/activin-like kinase 2 (AVCR1/ALK2)2.3. Some authors
have suggested that blocking the activity of the AVCR1/ALK2 receptor
through the development of therapeutic agents that behave like signal
transduction inhibitors that encode these proteins may be useful4. In this
respect, we know that dorsomorphin, a small molecule produced by the
zebrafish, inhibits BMP type I receptors (including ALK2—implicated in
the etiology and pathogenesis of the disease—and other activin-like
kinases like ALK3 and ALK6)5; however, given the lack of specificity
of this molecule, further studies are needed in this line of research, as well
as the development of in vivo models to determine the potential efficacy
of this molecule in the prevention of the flares of ossification that occur in
this serious disease.
References:
1. Connor JM, et al. J Med Genet 1982;19:35.2. Kaplan FS, et al. Hum
Mutat 2009;30:379. 3. Morales-Piga A, et al. Reumatol Clin
2014;10:389.4. Pignolo RJ, et al. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev
2013;10(Suppl 2):437.5. Yu PB, et al. Nat Chem Biol 2008;4:3.
P808
A SURROGATE FRAX MODEL IN ZIMBABWE
H. Johansson1,2, E. Liu1, M. Lorentzon1,2, L. Vandenput1,2, N. C.
Harvey3, E. V. McCloskey4, F. Paruk5, R. Ferrand6,10, C. Ndhlovu7, S.
Dela8, C. Gregson9, B. Cassim5, J. A. Kanis1,4
1Mary McKillop Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic
University, Melbourne, Australia, 2Sahlgrenska Osteoporosis Center,
Institute of Medicine, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden,
3MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK, 4Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, 5College of Health Sciences, University of
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa, 6Biomedical Research and
Training Institute, Harare, Zimbabwe, 7Internal Medicine Unit,
University of Zimbabwe Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Harare, Zimbabwe, 8Dept. of Internal Medicine, Edendale Hospital,
School of Clinical Medicine (SCM), University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Durban, South Africa, 9Musculoskeletal Research Unit, Bristol Medical
School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK, 10London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Objective: FRAX models are frequently requested for countries with
little or no data on the incidence of hip fracture. In such circumstances,
the International Society for Clinical Densitometry and International
Osteoporosis Foundation have recommended the development of a
surrogate FRAX model, based on country-specific mortality data but
using fracture data from a country, usually within the region, where
fracture rates are considered to be representative of the index country.
This abstract describes the development and characteristics of a surrogate
FRAX model for Zimbabwe.
Methods: The FRAX model used the ethnic-specific incidence of hip
fracture in Black men and women living in South Africa, combined with
the death risk for Zimbabwe in 2015-2019. The number of hip fractures in
2015 and 2050 were estimated based on United Nations predicted
changes in population demography.
Results: The surrogate FRAX model gave somewhat lower 10-year
fracture probabilities for men and women at all older ages compared to
the model for Black men and women in South Africa, reflecting the
competing higher mortality risk in Zimbabwe. There were very close
correlations in fracture probabilities between the surrogate Zimbabwean
and the Black South African models (r>0.998) so that the use of the
Zimbabwe model had little impact on the rank order of risk, i.e., a person
S381
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
at the xth percentile of risk with one model will be at the xth percentile of
risk with the other. It was estimated that 1023 hip fractures arose in 2015
in individuals age 50 years and older in Zimbabwe, with a predicted 3.8-
fold increase expected by 2050, when 3900 hip fractures are expected
nationally.
Conclusion: The surrogate FRAX model for Zimbabwe (https://
www.sheffield.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.aspx?country=81) provides an
opportunity to determine fracture probability within the Zimbabwean
population and help guide decisions about treatment. Research is
underway to derive novel Zimbabwean hip fracture incidence data with
which to refine this FRAX model.
P809
BONE VESSEL RELATIONSHIPS: ASSOCIATION BETWEEN
CALCIFICATIONS OF THE ILIAC ARTERIES WITH
VERTEBRAL FRACTURES IN HEMODIALYSIS PATIENTS
RESULTS FROM THE VIKI STUDY
M. Fusaro1, C. Politi2, A. Aghi3, F. Taddei4, E. Schileo4, T. L. Nickolas5,
P. Khairallah5, M. L. Brandi6, S. L. Ferrari7, M. C. Mereu8, G. Tripepi2,
R. De Caterina9
1National Research Council (CNR) – Institute of Clinical Physiology
(IFC), Pisa, Italy, 2CNR-IFC, Clinical Epidemiology of Renal Diseases
and Hypertension, Ospedali Riuniti, Reggio Calabria, Italy, 3Dept. of
Medicine, Clinica Medica 1, University of Padua, Padova, Italy,
4Bioengineering and Computing Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico
Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy, 5Division of Nephrology, Dept. of Medicine,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, USA, 6Dept.
of Surgery and Translational Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy, 7Service des Maladies Osseuses, Département de
Médecine, HUG, Genève, Switzerland, 8Independent Research,
Cagliari, Italy, 9Chair of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Division, Pisa
University Hospital, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
Objective: Vascular calcification and fragility fractures are common age-
related disorders and associated with high morbidity and mortality
especially in endstage renal disease. Skeletal disorders occur in dialysis
patients. Few studies have provided data on the prevalence of vertebral
fractures (VFs) and their association with large artery calcifications. We
evaluated the relationship of iliac arteries calcifications (IACs) and
abdominal aorta calcifications (AACs) with the risk for VFs in
hemodialysis (HD) patients.
Methods: The VIKI Study is a cross-sectional study involving 387 HD
patients from 18 Italian dialysis centers. Biochemical data included bone
health markers such as vitamin K levels, vitamin 25(OH)D, alkaline
phosphatase, PTH, calcium, phosphate, osteocalcin and Matrix Gla
Protein. The presence of VF, IACs and AACs were determined through
standardized spine lateral radiographs. A >20% reduction of vertebral
body height was considered a VF. We quantified vascular calcifications
by measuring the length of calcium deposits along the arteries classifying
the degree of severity for the IACs and AACs with a specific score (mild:
0.1–3 cm; moderate: 3.1–5 cm; and severe >5 cm) previously validated
for AACs.
Results: The prevalence of IACs was 56.1%, and of AACs 80.6%. After
adjusting for confounding variables, the presence of IACs was associated
with 73% higher odds of VF (p=0.028), whereas we found no association
(p=0.294) for AACs. The presence of IACs associated with VF
irrespective of calcification severity. Patients with IACs had lower levels
of the vitamin K2, menaquinone 7 (MK7) (0.99 vs. 1.15 ng/ml; p=0.003),
and deficiency of this marker became greater when adjusting for
triglyceride levels (0.57 vs. 0.87 ng/ml; p<0.001).
Conclusion: The presence of IACs, regardless of their extent, appears to
be a clinically relevant risk factor for VFs. The association is further
enhanced by including vitamin K, a main player in bone and vascular
health, in the model. Prospective studies are needed to confirm these
findings both in chronic kidney disease patients and in the general
population.
Figure. Graphical representation of the main results of our study
P810
WHAT TO DO AFTER REBOUND-ASSOCIATED VERTEBRAL
F R A C T U R E S
F O L L O W I N G
D E N O S U M A B
DISCONTINUATION? A REAL LIFE STUDY
C. Pelegrin1, V. Farías1, F. Jercovich1, M. B. Zanchetta1
1IDIM Institution, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Objective: To investigate BMD and bone turnover markers (BTM)
changes after restarting osteoporosis treatment with denosumab
(Dmab), zoledronate or teriparatide, in postmenopausal women who
had sustained rebound-associated vertebral fractures (RAVFs) following
Dmab discontinuation.
Methods: We performed a retrospective observational study. We
examined lumbar spine (LS), femoral neck (FN) and total hip (TH)
DXA scans (Lunar Prodigy Advance, software 13.6) and assessed C-
telopeptide (CTx) (normal value 74-550 pg/mL) and osteocalcin (BGP)
(normal value 11-43 ng/mL), at the time of the reinitiation treatment (RT)
and after one year of follow-up.
Results: We included nine women (mean age 66 y, range 52-84) that
came to our center after RAVFs occurrence. The duration of Dmab
treatment before the RAVFs was 24 months (range 11-77). 78% had
received bisphosphonates before Dmab and 33% had suffered prevalent
vertebral fractures. Median number of RAVFS was 2 (range 1-5). None
of them had received bisphosphonates after stopping Dmab. After one
year of the RT with Dmab (n=4), teriparatide (n=3) and zoledronate (n=2)
there were no significant gain or loss in any of the DXA regions.
Figure shows de 12-month percentage changes from BMD RT according
to the different treatment used. CTx and BGP levels significantly
decreased with Dmab (p=0.030 and p=0.002, respectively) and did not
shown a significant change with zoledronate or teriparatide. However, we
observed an increasing trend in CTx and BGP levels with teriparatide
(CTX +117.6%, p=0.524) (BGP+186.9%, p=0.443). No patient suffered
additional vertebral fractures.
S382
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Figure. 12-month % of changes from BMD baseline according to
reinitiation treatment.
Conclusion: In this group of patients with RAVFs after Dmab
discontinuation there were no significant changes with all treatment
regimens after 1 y and BTM significantly decreased with Dmab.
However, we observed tendencies and probably in the future we will be
able to provide additional information on the BMD and BTM behavior
after RAVFs using different treatment regimens. It is important to note
that no patient suffered additional fractures. Nevertheless, the sample is
small and larger studies are needed to reach stronger conclusions
regarding what treatment to use after RAVFs.
P811
FRAX BASED INTERVENTION THRESHOLDS FOR
PAKISTAN
H. Johansson1, G. Naureen2, R. Iqbal3, L. Jafri4, A. Khan4, M. Umer5, E.
Liu1, L. Vandenput1, M. Lorentzon1, E. V. McCloskey6, J. A. Kanis1, N.
C. Harvey7
1Mary McKillop Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic
University, Melbourne, Australia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and
Health Sciences, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Depts
of Community Health Sciences and Medicine, Aga Khan University,
Karachi, Pakistan, 4Dept. of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Aga
Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan, 5Dept. of Orthopaedics, Aga Khan
University, Karachi, Pakistan, 6Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, 7MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology
Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
Objective: The fracture risk assessment algorithm FRAX® has been
recently calibrated for Pakistan, but guidance is needed to apply fracture
probabilities to clinical practice.
Methods: The age-specific ten-year probabilities of a major osteoporotic
fracture were calculated in women with average BMI (25 kg/m2) to
determine fracture probabilities at two potential intervention thresholds.
The first comprised the age-specific fracture probabilities associated with
a femoral neck T-score of -2.5 SD. The second approach determined age-
specific fracture probabilities equivalent to a woman with a prior fragility
fracture without BMD. The parsimonious use of BMD was additionally
explored by the computation of upper and lower assessment thresholds
for BMD testing.
Results: When a BMD T-score ≤−2.5 SD was used as an intervention
threshold, FRAX probabilities in women aged 50 y were approximately
2-fold higher than in women of the same age but with an average BMI
and no risk factors. The relative increase in risk associated with the BMD
threshold decreased progressively with age such that, at the age of 80 y or
more, a T-score of -2.5 SD was actually protective. The 10-y probability
of a major osteoporotic fracture by age, equivalent to women with a
previous fracture, rose with age from 2.1% at the age of 40 y to 17%, at
the age of 90, and identified women at increased risk at all ages.
Conclusion: Intervention thresholds based on BMD alone do not
effectively target women at high fracture risk, particularly in the elderly.
In contrast, intervention thresholds based on fracture probabilities
equivalent to a ‘fracture threshold’ target women at high fracture risk.
P812
A SURROGATE FRAX MODEL FOR NEPAL
H. Johansson1, D. Pandey2, E. Liu1, M. Lorentzon1, L. Vandenput1, N. C.
Harvey3, E. V. McCloskey4, J. A. Kanis1
1Mary McKillop Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic
University, Melbourne, Australia, 2National Trauma Centre in
Kathmandu, Kathmandu, Nepal, 3MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK, 4Centre for Metabolic
Bone Diseases, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
Objective: FRAX models are frequently requested for countries with
little or no data on the incidence of hip fracture. In such circumstances,
the International Society for Clinical Densitometry and International
Osteoporosis Foundation have recommended the development of a
surrogate FRAX model, based on country-specific mortality data but
using fracture data from a country, usually within the region, where
fracture rates are considered to be representative of the index country.
This abstract describes the development and characteristics of a surrogate
FRAX model for Nepal.
Methods: The FRAX model used the ethnic-specific incidence of hip
fracture in Indian men and women living in Singapore, combined with
the death risk for Nepal (UN, 2015-2019).
Results: The surrogate model gave somewhat lower 10-y fracture
probabilities for men and women at all older ages compared to the model
for coloured from Singapore Indians, reflecting a higher mortality risk in
Nepal. The surrogate model for Nepal was similar to the Indian surrogate
model using the same fracture risk. There were very close correlations in
fracture probabilities between the surrogate and authentic models, so that
the use of the Nepal model had little impact on the rank order of risk. It
was estimated that 6711 hip fractures arose in 2015 in individuals over the
age of 50 y in Nepal, with a predicted increase by more than 3 times to
22,768 in 2050.
Conclusion: The surrogate FRAX model for Nepal provides an
opportunity to determine fracture probability within the Nepal population
and help guide decisions about treatment.
P813
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF HIP FRACTURES IN SAUDI ARABIA:
DEVELOPMENT OF A COUNTRY SPECIFIC FRAX MODEL
H. Johansson1, Y. Saleh2, E. Liu1, M. Lorentzon1, L. Vandenput1, N. C.
Harvey3, E. V. McCloskey4, J. A. Kanis1
1Mary McKillop Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic
University, Melbourne, Australia, 2King Saud University for Health
Sciences, Saudi Osteoporosis Society, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3MRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK, 4Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
Objective: To describe the epidemiology of hip fractures in Saudi Arabia,
which was then used to develop the country-specific fracture prediction
FRAX® tool.
Methods: Hip fractures (ICD 10: S72.0, S72.1, S72.2) were identified
occurring in years 2017 and 2018 in representative hospitals from various
regions (Riyadh, Dammam, Makkah Al Mokaramah, Jazan, Al-Jouf, Al-
Baha, Tabouk, Najran and Hail). A total of 15 hospitals that admit and
operate on patients with hip fractures were selected, representing
approximately 12.8% of the country’s population. Age- and sex-specific
incidence of hip fracture and national mortality rates were incorporated
into a FRAX model for Saudi Arabia. Fracture probabilities were
compared with those from neighbouring countries having FRAX models.
Results: The incidence of hip fracture applied nationally suggested that
the estimated number of hip fractures nationwide in persons over the age
of 50 y for 2015 was 2949 and is predicted to increase to 20,328 in 2050.
Hip fracture rates were comparable with estimates from Abu Dhabi and
S383
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Kuwait. By contrast, probabilities of a major osteoporotic fracture or hip
fracture from the age of 70 y were much lower than those seen in
Abu Dhabi and Kuwait due to higher mortality estimates for Saudi
Arabia. The remaining lifetime probability of a hip fracture from the
age of 50 y was 4.6% in women and 3.7% in men. These probabilities
were lower than those in Abu Dhabi (8.9 and 8.1%, respectively).
Conclusion: The FRAX model should enhance accuracy of determining
fracture probability among the Saudi Arabian population and help guide
decisions about treatment.
P814
ASSESSMENT OF FRACTURE RISK TOOLS IN CARE HOME
RESIDENTS: A MULTICENTRE OBSERVATIONAL PILOT
STUDY
F. Ihama1, A. Pandyan2, C. Roffe2
1Pilgrim Hospital, Boston, 2Keele University, Keele, UK
Objective: Fragility fractures are common in care home residents but
established tools have not been tested in this population. Aim: To identify
the most practicable tool for use.
Methods: Design: Multicentre prospective observational cohort pilot
study. Setting: 18 care homes in Boston, UK. Assessments: Fragility risk
score at baseline with FRAX, QFractureScore, Garvan nomogram, BMI
and TUGT for each participant. Outcomes: falls, fractures, combined falls
& fractures. Follow-up; 12 months.
Results: 217/618 (35%) residents in the 18 care homes were enrolled.
147 (68%) had mental capacity, 70 (32%) did not. There were 325 falls
and 10 fractures in participants during the study. At the same time there
were 1671 falls and 103 fractures in residents not participating in the
study. Multiple regression analyses showed that only age had a
statistically significant association with falls (χ2(1)=5.7775, p=0.0162),
fractures (χ2(1)=4.7269, p=0.0297) and combined falls & fractures
(χ2(1)=4.7269, p=0.0297). C-statistics were: falls; FRAX 0.544, BMI
0.610, QFractureScore 0.554, Garvan nomogram 0.579, TUGT 0.656,
fractures; FRAX 0.655, BMI 0.708, QFractureScore 0.736, Garvan
nomogram 0.712, TUGT 0.590, combined falls and fractures, c-
statistics were same as for fractures. Fifty-four participants (25%) died
during follow-up. Charlson comorbidity index predicted mortality,
R²=0.021 (p=0.034).
Conclusions: QFractureScore, BMI and Garvan nomogram were good
predictors of fractures and combined falls and fractures, Of these BMI is
the easiest to use and therefore most suitable for this population. Only age
had statistically significant association with the outcomes. Thus using
BMI, age and CCI, an algorithm was designed for fragility risk
assessment for care home residents
Disclosure: This study was for a Doctor of Medicine degree at Keele
University. It was privately funded.
P815
FROM OSTEOPENIA TO OSTEOPOROSIS DURING COVID-19
PANDEMIC LOCKDOWN
A. Ghemigian1, N. Dumitru1, G. Voicu2, E. Petrova1, M. Popescu3
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology & C. Davila University
of Medicine & Pharmacy, Bucharest, 2C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucharest, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy
Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: COVID-19 pandemic and associated rules including
lockdown periods of time associate limited physical activity which
otherwise is boost of bone formation, increased risk of sarcopenia and
developing vitamin D deficiency, as well as depression requiring
medication. Any of these or together might increase the risk of
osteoporotic fracture (1-5). We aim to present the aggravation of bone
profile after first 15 months since pandemic emerged.
Case report: This is a 59-year-old, nonsmoker, menopausal female, who
was admitted for non-specific bone and joints pain since last months, also
associating persistent lumbar pain. She associated treated hypothyroidism
of post-thyroidectomy type (for a benign multinodular goiter), controlled
arterial hypertension, hyperlipemia. Prepandemic bone assays showed a
25-hydroxyvitamin D of 27 ng/mL (she started vitamin D
supplementation with 1000 UI/d of cholecalciferol), normal PTH and
bone turnover markers, normal profile X-Ray (screening) of the
thoracic-lumbar spine; central DXA (GE Lunar Prodigy device) showed
L1-4 BMD of 0.953 g/cm2, T-score of -2.3SD, Z-score of -1.1SD, neck
BMD of 0.796 g/cm2, T-score of -1.7 SD, Z-score of -0.7 SD, total hip
BMD of 0.951g/cm2, T-score of -0.4SD, Z-score of 0.2 SD. Current
evaluation, after limited physical activity and lockdown periods, she
showed normal serum calcium, high CrossLaps of 0.75 ng/mL, normal
osteocalcin of 31 ng/mL, high P1NP of 91 pg/mL (normal:15-65 pg/mL),
and PTH of 31 pg/mL, 25OHD of 32 ng/mL (under supplements), normal
TSH under daily 50 μg of levothyroxine. The profile X Ray of the spine
showed a new T4 vertebral fracture while DXA-BMD at L1-4 decreased
to 0.814 g/cm2, with a T-score of -3 SD, Z-score of -1.9 SD, neck BMD of
0.745 g/cm2, T-score of -2.3 SD. In the meantime, she was diagnosed
with depression and started therapy with SSRIs. She also needed several
stomatological interventions, thus daily 20 μg of teriparatide was
recommended in addition to vitamin D 1000UI/d.
Conclusion: This aspect of real life medicine during pandemic is an
argument for serial checking the bone status after first year of pandemic
even in patients who were not at high fracture risk.
References:
1.
Poiana C, et al. Maturitas 2009;62:98.
2.
Bechir ES, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;70:3176.
3.
Radu L, et al. Revista de Chimie 2018;69:3483.
4.
Poiana C, et al. Bone Res 2013;1:275.
5.
Sandru F, et al. Exp Ther Med 2020;20:3389.
P816
B M D A C C U R A C Y E R R O R S I N P H A N T O M L E S S
CALIBRATION OF CT SCANS: A SIMULATION STUDY
S. Bartenschlager1, O. Chaudry1, P. Dankerl2, M. Uder2, K. Engelke1
1Institute of Medical Physics, 2Dept. of Radiology, University Hospital
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
Objective: For opportunistic screening, internal calibration is one option
to convert measured CT values to BMD. CT values of two internal
calibration materials (ICM) must be determined. In this study, we
simulated the impact of accuracy errors of the measured CT values of
selected ICMs on BMD.
Methods: Simulations used the base-material decomposition approach to
obtain BMD of bone-equivalent hydroxyapatite (HA) from combinations
of two ICMs, namely subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT)/blood, SAT/
skeletal muscle (SM) and SAT/SM including 20% fat. Errors in measured
CT values were assumed to originate from an inaccurate water calibration
of the CT scanner or an impact of plaques on blood, edema on SAT and
unknown fat content on SM. Realistic CT accuracy errors were estimated
from a cohort of 121 elderly women (age 71.5 5.2 y) and were used by the
simulation to calculate the resulting percentage BMD accuracy errors.
Results: It was assumed that the ICM CT value distribution arises from a
convolution of the true population variance with CT variations due to
scanner instabilities characterized by the CT value distribution of air.
Then the population variance σpop can be obtained from a deconvolution
of the measured CT value distribution of a given ICM with the
distribution of air (Table (top)). Lowest BMD errors ΔBMDHA were
obtained for the combinations SAT/blood or SAT/SM, whereas an
increased fat content in muscle also increases the BMD error
(Table (bottom)). There was no impact of the water miscalibration.
S384
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: The use of SM as ICM may result in larger BMD errors due
to unknown fat content. The combination blood/SAT produced the lowest
BMD accuracy errors. The important effect of contrast agents and
longitudinal precision errors on internal calibration still needs to be
evaluated.
Table. The population dependent standard deviation obtained by
deconvolution (top) was used in the simulation as input for the accuracy
error of the ICM CT value, yielding the percentage BMD error when
using different ICM combinations for internal calibration (bottom).
P817
ARE LOCAL POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS RELATED
TO ANTIOSTEOPOROSIS MEDICATION (AOM) DISPENSED
IN ENGLAND? AN ECOLOGICAL STUDY
S. S. Janjua1, A. Sami2, H. Boardman1, L. S. Toh1, M. K. Javaid2
1Division of Pharmacy Practice and Policy, School of Pharmacy,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 2Nuffield Dept. of
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Botnar
Research Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Objective: Determine whether population characteristics of Clinical
Commissioning Group (CCG) areas are associated with prevalence of
AOM dispensed via community pharmacies in England.
Methods: This ecological study used the Open Prescribing database, to
analyse items of AOM dispensed via community pharmacies in England
in 2019. CCG areas were mapped to Health Authority (HA) areas by
population numbers from the Office for National Statistics.
Characteristics of the local HA population which coincided with a CCG
area were analysed to explore association with rate of AOM/1000 people
aged over 65 y. CCG and HA areas with population and geographical
discrepancies were excluded. Linear regression analysis of population
characteristics was carried out to see if they were individually related to
rate of AOM/1000 people aged over 65 y. This was followed by entry of
population characteristics into a multilinear regression model. Outliers
were identified, removed and the multilinear regression model repeated.
Results: 94 CCGs were included in the analysis. Linear regression
analysis showed percentage of population aged over 65 y, Male
Healthy Life Expectance (MHLE), Female Healthy Life Expectancy
(FHLE), percentage Smoked, percentage Active adults and Alcohol
related Hospital admissions/100,000 for a CCG area were all significantly
associated (p<0.05) with the rate of AOM/1000 people aged over 65 y.
Multilinear regression (n=94) was conducted, outliers identified and
removed and the multilinear regression model repeated for 85 CCG areas.
Β values of -0.256 (percentage population over 65 y), 0.286 (MHLE), -
0.228 (FHLE), -0.021 (percent smoked), -0.71 (percent Active adults)
and 0.386 (Alcohol related Hospital admissions/100,000) were obtained.
Percentage population aged over 65 y and Alcohol related Hospital
admissions/00,000 were significant predictors of rate of AOM/1000
population aged over 65 y (P≤0.05).
Conclusion: In England, the rate of AOM/1000 population aged over 65
years is significantly associated with the percentage of people over 65 y
and rate of Alcohol related hospital admissions/100,000 for a CCG area
(n=85). Population characteristics of MHLE, FHLE, percentage people
who Smoke, and percent Active adults are also associated, although not
significantly (p≥0.05).
P818
CORRELATION BETWEEN FREE RADICALS AND
REACTIVE OXYGEN SPECIES (ROS)
R. Amir1
1Centre de Santé des Fagnes Chimay, Chimay, Belgium
Objective: A free radical is an atom or group of atoms that have one or
more unpaired electrons. Radicals can have positive, negative or neutral
charge. A prominent feature of radicals is that they have extremely high
chemical reactivity, which explains not only their normal biological
activities, but how they inflict damage on cells.
Methods: Persistent oxidative stress is one of the major causes of most
lifestyle-related diseases, cancer and the aging process (1-2). Oxidative
stress arises from the strong cellular oxidizing potential of excess ROS
(3). There are many types of radicals, but those of most concern in biological
systems are derived from oxygen, and known collectively as ROS.
Many antioxidant supplements could not prevent cancer, myocardial
infarction and atherosclerosis, but rather conversely increase mortality
(4-5).
Results: It is well known that it is important to be aware of side effects
when developing an effective antioxidant for the prevention of oxidative
stress-related diseases. ROS are generated inside the body throughout our
daily lives, such as during hard exercise, smoking, exposure to ultraviolet
rays or air pollution, aging, physical or psychological stress (6-7). Inside
every aerobic organism, ROS are generated when breathing consumes
oxygen.
Conclusion: ROS are one of the major causes of acute and chronic
diseases. Acute oxidative stress arises from various different situations:
inflammation, cardiac or cerebral infarction, organ transplantation, heavy
exercise, cessation of operative bleeding and others (8).
References:
1. Andersen JK. Nat Med 2004;10 suppl:S18.
2. Finkel T, et al. Nature 2000;408:239.
3. Wallace DC. Annu Rev Genet 2005;39:359.
4. Steinhubl SR. Am J Cardiol 2008;101:14D.
5. Hckam DG. ACP J Club 2007;147:4.
6. Harma MI, et al. Eur J Appl Physiol 2006;97:505.
7. Agarwal R. BMC Nephrol 2005;6:13.
8. Ferrari R. et al. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 1991;5(Suppl 2):277.
P819
BUROSUMAB TREATMENT IN ADULT PATIENTS
AFFECTED BY SEVERE X-LINKED HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC
RICKETS
G. Marcucci1, L. Cianferotti1, L. Masi2, M. Duradoni3, C. Fossi1, S.
Parri1, M. L. Brandi4
1Bone Metabolic Diseases Unit, Dept. of Experimental and Clinical
Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, 2Bone Metabolic Diseases
Unit, University Hospital of Florence, 3Dept. of Information Engineering,
University of Florence, 4Fondazione Italiana di Ricerca sulle Malattie
dell’Osso (FIRMO), Florence, Italy
Objective: X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH) is a rare disease caused
by PHEX gene mutations. The objective of this study is to report clinical,
biochemical results and effects on motor function and quality of life in
two adult XLH patients treated with burosumab. They have been
S385
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
previously treated with standard therapy and had severe clinical
complications.
Methods: Two adult male patients (Caucasian; aged 59 and 52), with
XLH diagnosis in childhood, have been treated for 6 months with
burosumab (1 mg/kg: 90 and 60 mg respectively) subcutaneously every
28 d. Blood and urinary exams were performed at baseline and then
monthly. Questionnaires (Quality of Life: 36-Item Short Form Survey)
and tests (Brief Pain Inventory, 6-Min Walk Test, Time Up & Go Test
and Grip test) were performed at baseline and after 6 months.
Results: Serum phosphate levels, below the normal range (1.6 and 1.7 mg/
dl; normal range: 2.5-4.9) at baseline, quickly increased and normalized as
early as 2 weeks. In the first patient, normal phosphatemia level was
maintained for all period, while in the second patient phosphatemia level
reduced to just below the normal range (2.2-2.4 mg/dl) from 3 to 6 months.
No severe adverse events were reported. In both patients, a statistically
significant increase (p=0.02) of serum procollagen 1 N-terminal propeptide
was described at 6 months. The questionnaire on quality of life showed an
improvement trend at 6 months compared to the baseline for some scores
(perception of general health and vitality) and all tests on joint-bone pain
and motor function also showed a tendency to improvement.
Conclusion: These case reports contribute to establishing efficacy of
burosumab treatment (1-4) also in adulthood with severe musculoskeletal
manifestations. In addition, our results suggest that the currently
recommended burosumab dosage (1 mg/kg) may not always be optimal
for all patients and perhaps some minor adjustments may be needed.
Furthermore, in the future, quality of life questionnaires and specific
muscle function tests could be used on a large scale in XLH patients
treated with burosumab.
References:
1. Haffner D, et al. Nat Rev Nephrol 2019;15:435.
2. Insogna KL, et al. J Bone Miner Res 2018;33:1383.
3) Portale AA, et al. Calcif Tissue Int 2019;105:271.
4) Marcucci G, et al. Osteoporos Int 2018;29:2369.
Acknowledgments: BOND-ERN, ENDO-ERN, and Kyowa Kirin s.r.l.
P820
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS IN A RAPIDLY PROGRESSIVE
DERMATOMYOSITIS
S. C. Dinescu1, S. C. Firulescu1, D. C. Parvanescu1, B. A. Chisalau1, C.
Criveanu1, A. L. Barbulescu1, C. E. Gofita1, A. E. Musetescu1, A.
Florescu1, P. L. Ciurea1, A. F. Vreju1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy Craiova, Craiova, Romania
We present the case of a 49 year-old female patient admitted to the
emergency department after developing severe muscle weakness of the
arms and thighs, marked oedema extending along the proximal segments
of the limbs, erythematous rash of the face, chest and arms. Patient history
included bilateral surgical removal of cystic formations of increased size,
which were not labelled as malignant. The patient’s general state altered
since one week, she became bed ridden, with muscle weakness involving
also the neck flexors.
Laboratory tests based on the clinical suspicion of dermatomyositis
revealed very high muscle enzymes – creatinkinase, aspartate
transaminase, lactate dehydrogenase. The autoimmune panel for
antinuclear antibodies was positive for anti-Ro52, but a myositis antibody
panel was not available. Electromyography and muscle biopsy confirmed
the diagnosis of inflammatory myopathy. Further evaluation by
musculoskeletal ultrasound detected a marked subcutaneous oedema
and typical features of acute myositis which include loss of “starry sky”
appearance, hyperechoic muscle tissue and also a proximally increased
degree of stiffness on elastography.
The patient showed partial clinical response after three day course of
methylprednisolone 1 g/d and was further maintained on a dose of 0.5
g/d. Although subcutaneous oedema receded and the patient gained some
muscle strength, a major concern was the persistent and progressive
dysphagia. Immunosuppressive therapy with methotrexate 7.5mg/week
was initiated along with maintenance of high dose corticosteroid. The
patient developed severe dysphagia, with need of parenteral nutritional
support and repetitive tracheobronchial aspiration. A major concern at
this point was the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Lack of clinical
improvement prompted also the use of intravenous immunoglobulin
which was administered in two doses of 0.5 g/kg. Three weeks from
admission, the patient develops acute respiratory failure and dies after
cardiorespiratory arrest.
This case report describes a severe form of dermatomyositis in which
presence of multiple prognostic factors was linked to a very poor
outcome. These factors include corticosteroid resistance, acute
presentation with extensive subcutaneous oedema and upper dysphagia.
Although immunosuppressive therapy should be added in refractory
cases, initial response to high dose corticosteroid is crucial in clinical
forms with rapid progression.
P821
SHORT- AND LONG-TERM PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
ASSOCIATED WITH FUNCTIONAL RECOVERY IN
ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH HIP FRA CTURE: A
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
B. Araiza-Nava1, L. Méndez-Sánchez1, B. M. Martínez-Hernández2, P.
Clark1, M. L. Peralta-Pedrero3, F. Guzmán-Jiménez4
1Faculty of Medicine of National Autonomous University of Mexico
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México)/ Clinical Epidemiology
Research Unit Hospital Infantil de Mexico Federico Gomez, 2Faculty of
Medicine of National Autonomous University of Mexico (Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México), 3Faculty of Medicine of National
Autonomous University of Mexico (Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México), Dermatologic Center Dr. Ladislao de la Pascua, 4Faculty
of Medicine of National Autonomous University of Mexico
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), UMAE Hospital de
Traumatología y Ortopedia Lomas Verdes, Instituto Mexicano del
Seguro Social, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: To identify short and long-term factors (biological, clinical,
and sociodemographic) associated with functional recovery of elderly hip
fracture patients after hospital discharge; and assess the use of the hip
fracture core-set and key-performance indicators for secondary
refractures reduction. (Javaid-MK-2020)
Methods: A search was performed in seven electronic databases.
Observational studies reporting predictors after usual care of elderly
patients with hip fracture diagnoses receiving surgical or conservative
treatment were included. Primary outcomes considered were part of the
domains corresponding to functional capacity. The protocol was
registered in PROSPERO (CRD42020149563).
Results: Of 3873 references identified, and after the screening and
selection process, 43 studies were included. Forty-nine functional
measures were identified for ten functional outcomes, including
BADLs, IADLs, ambulation and, mobility. Biological characteristics
such as age, sex, comorbidities, cognitive status, nutritional state, and
biochemical parameters are significantly associated. Determinants such
as contact and size of social network and those related to institutional care
quality are relevant for functional recovery at six and 12 months. Age,
prefracture function, cognitive status, and complications continue to be
associated five years after discharge. We found 74 associated factors to
functional recovery of elderly hip fracture patients. Ten of the studies
reported rehabilitation programs as suggested in KPI 9; none used the
complete hip fracture core-set.
Conclusion: Most of the associated factors for functional recovery of
elderly hip fracture were biological, sociodemographic, or inherent
factors to patients' baseline characteristics, including their pre-facture
functional capacity. For the core-set and KPIs, we found an insufficient
S386
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
use and report. This study reports 49 different instruments to measure
functional capacity.
P822
EFFECT OF MODIFIED SURYA NAMASKAR ALONG WITH
PRANAYAMA ON BALANCE AND QUALITY OF LIFE IN
GERIATRIC PATIENT WITH OSTEOPOROSIS
A. Kaur1, M. Mitra1, G. Kaur2
1MVP's College of Physiotherapy, Nashik, 2Wellness Forever, Mumbai,
India
Objective: Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterised by a
low BMD and increased risk of fractures. While the quality of life of an
individual is affected by fall accidents, management of post-fall disability
in the elderly could be a huge economic burden to the society. Treatment
of these patients has to be comprehensive and include both,
pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions. This study
aimed to investigate how modified surya namaskar (modified sun
salutations using a chair) along with pranayama in the duration of 6 weeks
can impact the balance and quality of life in geriatric patient with
osteoporosis.
Methods: This quasi experimental study was conducted on 33 patients
both male and female with diagnosed osteoporosis, ages between 60-75
y, having no mobility problems, 27 of whom completed the 6 week
exercise sessions program. Patients with asymmetric gait pattern, use of
an assistive device for walking, evidence of neuromuscular illness, major
orthopedic diagnosis in the lower back, pelvis, or lower extremities were
excluded from the study. Session included warm up (seated shoulder
circles, wrist rolls, sit to stand, standing heel and toe raises, abduction,
and heel walking.), pranayama (breathing exercises), modified surya
namaskar (modified sun salutations using a chair) followed by relaxation.
Before and after treatment protocol the patients balance was assessed
using Timed Up and Go Test (TUG), Patients quality of life was
evaluated using Nottingham Health Profile. Statistical analyses of the data
was carried out by comparing of the values obtained before and after
treatment protocol by using paired parametric t test.
Results: The mean age of the participants with osteoporosis were 66.00
±3.87 y. After sessions, there was a statistically significant decrease in
their TUG mobility scores (p<0.05) and their quality of life scores were
better than scores obtained before sessions (p<0.05).
Conclusion: This study concluded that modified surya namaskar along
with pranayama has the potential to alleviate problems related with
balance and quality of life in geriatric patient with osteoporosis.
P823
A META-ANALYTIC SYNTHESIS OF DPP4 INHIBITORS
COMPARED TO SULFONYLUREAS AS ADD-ON THERAPY
TO METFORMIN AND RISK OF FRACTURES IN PATIENTS
WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES: EVIDENCE FROM RANDOMIZED
CONTROLLED TRIALS
M. Azharuddin1, M. Sharma2
1Dept. of Pharmaceutical Medicine, Pharmacology, School of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi,
India, 2Dept. of Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India
Objective: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) affects bone metabolism
and increased risk of fracture among elderly population. There is no
consensus on the selection of specific drug therapies when metformin
not adequately responsive in T2DM. Evidence from the published clinical
studies suggested inconclusive results regarding effect of anti-diabetic
medications on the fracture risk. Therefore, this study aimed to determine
effect of DPP-4 Inhibitors compared to sulfonylureas as add-on therapy to
metformin in inadequately controlled patients with T2DM.
Methods: A systematic literature search on PubMed/Medline was
conducted to identify randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in patients with
T2DM. RCTs comparing DPP-4 Inhibitors vs. sulfonylureas as add-on
therapy to metformin in T2DM patients were included. We calculated
Peto odd ratio with 95%CI with fixed effect model to compare DPP-4
Inhibitors vs. sulfonylureas as add-on therapy to metformin. Meta-
analysis was performed by using RevMan 5.3 software.
Results: A total 7 RCTs including 8584 patients with 48 fracture cases.
From the included studies patient age, fasting blood glucose level,
HbA1c, BMI, and duration of diabetes were ranged from 54.30-72.60
y, 8.9-9.2 mmol/L, 7.5-8.1%, 30-32.5 kg/m2, and 5.5-7.6 y respectively.
Duration of trials were ranged from 30-104 weeks. Results from meta-
analysis showed nonsignificant association between overall risk of
fracture and DPP-4 inhibitors compared to sulfonylureas as add-on
therapy to metformin in inadequately controlled patients with T2DM
(Peto odd ratio: 1.45, 95%CI: 0.82-2.57; p=0.21). There was no
significant heterogeneity amongst the studies (I2=0%; p=0.86).
Conclusion: The current result suggests no detrimental effect of DPP-4
inhibitors on fractures risk compared to sulfonylureas in patients with
T2DM. The DPP-4 inhibitors and sulfonylureas can be considered as
options for add-on therapy to metformin in inadequately controlled
T2DM patients. Further long term follow-up RCTs and real world studies
are required to confirm the present findings.
P824
COEXISTENCE OF SARCOPENIA IS MORE WITH SEVERE
OSTEOPOROSIS: A STUDY IN A TERTIARY LEVEL
HOSPITAL IN BANGLADESH
M. I. Majumder1
1Central Medical College, Cumilla, Bangladesh
Objective: Sarcopenia is decline of muscle mass leading to impaired gait,
significant disability which is strongly associated with osteoporosis(OP).
Bone–muscle unit development and deterioration maintains a linear
relationship at various ages. Severe sarcopenia is low muscle mass plus
low muscle strength with low physical performance. This observational
study was done to see the coexistence of severity of sarcopenia with
severe OP in small population of Bangladesh.
Methods: Total 498 osteoporosis patients were included in this study.
Study place was medicine and Orthopaedic Dept. of Central Medical
College Hospital, Cumilla, Bangladesh in the period between January-
December 2020. OP was assessed by BMD estimation with DXA using
GE Healthcare Lunar Prodigy densitometer, considering T-score < -2.5
and -1 to -2.5. Fracture was determined by X-ray. Sarcopenia was
determined by relative skeletal muscle index (RSMI) by DXA (≤7.26
kg/m2 for men and ≤5.45 kg/m2 for women) hand grip strength (HGS)
(<30 kg in males, <20 kg in females) by Jamar dynamometer. Other
aspects of sarcopenia was assessed by walking speed (<0.8 m/s), Timed
Up and Go test (TUG) (>20 s).
Results: Among 498 patients, 467(93.78%) were female and 31(6.22%)
were male with average age 63±10 years ranging 32-100 y. 111(22.29%)
patients had severe OP with vertebral compression fracture 87(17.47%)
and femoral neck fracture 24(4.82%) and remaining 387(77.71%)
patients were osteoporotic without fracture. In severe OP group T-score
of lumbar spine was -4.08±1.19 and femoral neck -4.03±1.49
respectively with average RSMI 5.21±1 kg/m2, HGS- right 15.01
±5.08 kg and left 13±5.1 kg, Walking speed 0.58±0.12 m/s and TUG-
15.51±3.96 s having p value 0.0004. On other hand in OP without
fracture T-score of lumbar spine was -3.35±0.94 and femoral neck -
2.96±1.07 respectively with average RSMI 5.41±0.89 kg/m2, HGS- right
17.35±4.32 kg and left 15±4.2 kg, Walking speed 0.64±0.1 m/s and TUG
13.46±2.05 s having p value 0.007.
Conclusion: Sarcopenia is very much prevalent in osteoporotic patients
and severe sarcopenia is more coexistent with severe OP as assessed with
S387
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
multiple parameters with statistical significance in small section of
Bangladeshi population.
P825
M A G N E T I C
R E S O N A N C E
I M A G I N G
V S .
MUSCULOSKELETAL ULTRASOUND IN DETECTING
MENISCUS LESIONS
A. E. Musetescu1, P. L. Ciurea1, A. F. Vreju1, C. Criveanu1, S. C.
Dinescu1, A. Barbulescu1, B. Chisalau1, A. M. Bumbea1, A. Florescu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Musculoskeletal ultrasound (MUS) is an important imaging
method useful in detecting both degenerative and inflammatory changes
in peripheral joints [1]. MRI is considered the gold standard in assessing
musculoskeletal lesions [2]. The detection of meniscus tears is of great
importance in determining the cause of acute knee pain [3]. The aim of
our study is to determine the value of MUS in detecting meniscus lesions
compared to MRI.
Methods: The study included 32 patients with mean age of 58.6 y and a
male:female ratio of 23:9. The mandatory criteria for inclusion in the
study were the presence of mechanical knee joint pain, lasting for more
than 2 weeks with suspicion of a post-traumatic meniscus lesion, with
positive clinical maneuvers for meniscus tears. The patients underwent
clinical evaluation, laboratory tests, MUS examinations and MRI of the
affected knee. MUS scans of knee were performed using a MyLabSix
machine with a multi-frequency array probe. The patients also underwent
arthroscopy of the affected knee.
Results: The laboratory tests performed excluded other inflammatory
pathologies of the knee. Clinical maneuvers were positive for medial or
lateral meniscus lesions in 59.37% of patients. MUS assessed the
presence of meniscus tears in 71.87% of patients with the visualization
of meniscal cysts in 25% of patients. The MRI of the painful knee
demonstrated the presence of meniscus tears in 87.5% of patients, while
the meniscal cysts were evidenced in 25% of patients. The sensitivity and
specificity of MUS compared to MRI in detecting meniscus lesions were
89% vs. 94% and 48% vs. 51%.
Conclusion: Although MRI remains the gold standard in assessing
musculoskeletal lesions, MUS may be useful in the initial assessment
and fast diagnosis of meniscus lesions, being able to provide a faster,
dynamic and cost efficient examination.
References:
1.
Lapadat AM, et al. Rom J Morphol Embryol 2020;61:73.
2.
Musetescu AE, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1067.
3.
Florescu A. Life-Basel 2021;11:218.
P826
COVID-19 AS A HISTORIC EVENT AND AS A COLLECTIVE
TRAUMA
Y. Athanassiou1
1Faculty of Philology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece
Pandemics have always been a driving force in human history. From
mythology and the Iliad to Thucydides’ clinical description of the
Athenian plague in the second book of the History of the
Peloponnesian War and, of course, the recent outbreak of COVID-19 in
December 2019, pandemics disrupt the flow of history; they appear as
multifaceted crises that destabilize the social and political status quo. The
threat of a plague, the threat of contagion and death, weakens social,
economic, and political ties. The state struggles to maintain the validity
of its power; its authority is shaken by the appearance of the epidemic.
Social inequalities become more and more obvious. Isolation and fear
dominate.
However, even if pandemics shake us to our core as a collective, if we
want to truly understand the social and political gravity of epidemics, we
must turn our attention in the way they affect the psyche of the individual.
This effect, multiplied, creates a seismic shift that forces a nation and, in
the case of COVID-19, possibly the first true global pandemic, humanity
to redefine itself after every epidemic. Plagues challenge above all the
individual, who is the pillar of the social contract; they force her to rethink
her place in the community, her identity. They constitute crises that hinder
communication which is vital for human beings. And, crucially, as
COVID-19 proved to humanity, pandemics obstruct our ability to give
meaning in everyday rituals, through which the individual forms bonds
with others and comprehends the world around her. The feeling of futility
that spreads in the social web, and the inability to define the self in a fluid
and uncertain environment, work as catalysts for the chain reactions that
follow a health crisis.
P827
ASSESSMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS IN ANKYLOSING
SPONDYLITIS
A. E. Musetescu1, P. L. Ciurea1, A. F. Vreju1, C. Criveanu1, S. C.
Dinescu1, A. Barbulescu1, B. Chisalau1, A. M. Bumbea1, A. Florescu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Osteoporosis is a common complication of inflammatory
rheumatic diseases such as ankylosing spondylitis (AS) [1]. The studies
regarding the incidence of osteoporosis are controversial since AS is also
marked by new growth of bone leading to the development of
syndesmophytes and subsequent vertebral ankyloses [2, 3]. The aim of
our study is to assess the incidence of osteoporosis/osteopenia in AS
patients compared to a healthy control group.
Methods: The study included 26 patients with AS with mean age of 38.9
y and a male:female ratio of 23:3 and 26 age and sex-matched controls
with no risk factors for osteoporosis. The mandatory criteria for inclusion
in the study diagnosis of ankylosing spondylitis according to the The
assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society (ASAS) criteria
for axial spondyloarthritis with duration of disease activity of minimum
2 y. The BMD of the forearm and hip were assessed using DXA scanner.
Results: Patients with AS had significantly lower T-score at the forearm
and neck of femur than controls (T-score p=0.03 and p=0.015,
respectively). We also assessed the inflammatory markers and diseases
activity scores such as ASDAS and the (Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis
Disease Activity Index) BASDAI. Lower T-scores at the neck of the
femur were associated with ASDAS (p=0.0032), BASDAI (p=0.0045)
and C reactive protein levels (p=0.0037).
Conclusion: In our study group, the incidence of low T-scores was more
prominent in patients with AS than healthy controls and were also
associated with disease activity and inflammatory markers.
References:
1.
Dragoescu AN, et al. J Pers Med 2020;11:2.
2.
Musetescu AE, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:1122.
3.
Florescu A. Life-Basel 2021;11:218.
P828
THYROID HORMONE REPLACEMENT AND OSTEOPOROSIS
I N E U T H Y R O I D P O S T M E N O P A U S A L W O M E N :
EXPERIENCE FROM A SINGLE CENTER
J. Vilas-Boas1, C. Mazeda1, S. Silva1, A. Barcelos1
1Centro Hospitalar do Baixo Vouga - Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
Objective: To evaluate the BMD and number of fractures in osteoporotic
postmenopausal women treated with thyroid hormone replacement
S388
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
therapy (THR) in a cross-sectional study. Long term THR has been
suggested to be inversely correlated with BMD and increased risk of
fractures. It is still unclear if THR has a negative effect on bone
remodeling even in sustained euthyroid patients.
Methods: Data regarding 49 postmenopausal osteoporotic women with
ongoing THR treatment was collected from a single Portuguese center
orthopedic ward between 2019-2021. Patients treated for at least one year
with thyroxine, regardless of the dose, due to primary or secondary
hypothyroidism and with normal thyroid hormone levels (T4 and TSH)
were included. Patients with a potential secondary osteoporosis risk factor
were excluded. BMD was measured using a DXA scanner if considered
clinically appropriate. History of fragility fractures was
questioned. Patients were compared with a control comprised of
postmenopausal osteoporotic woman without thyroid pathology, using
the Mann-Whitney U Test. The level of significance was chosen as <0.05.
Results:
Feature
Intervention Group
(n=49)
Control Group
(n=164)
p-value
Age
x 76.1±SD 8.6
x 79.6±SD 10.3
0.428
BMI
x 28.27±SD 4.75
x 26.83±SD 4.47
0.207
Number fragility
fractures
x 1.32±SD 0.6
x 1.29±SD 1.1
0.135
T-score femoral neck
x -3.05±SD 2.1
x -2.17±SD 3.3
0.236
T-score lumbar spine
x -2.58±SD 0.9
x -2.80±SD 1.65
0.428
Regarding the intervention group at the time of investigation, the mean
replacement dosage of levothyroxine was 0.124±0.088 mcg/d. The mean
time of treatment with THR was 9.2±5.7 y.
Conclusion: In this cohort no statistically significant differences were
found regarding number of fragility fractures of any site and BMD
between euthyroid osteoporotic postmenopausal women treated with
THR and osteoporotic postmenopausal woman without thyroid
pathology. Due to the transversal nature of this study no data from
previous hormone thyroid status was recorded. This study indicates that
THR maintaining a euthyroid state in hypothyroid patients results in no
increased bone loss or risk of fracture in postmenopausal women. For
robust conclusions, we need large prospective cohort studies.
P829
ASTRAGALUS TINCTURA AS MEDICATION FOR
STRUCTURAL CHANGES OF THE BONES IN JUVENILE
RATS EXPOSED TO FORMALDEHYDE VAPORS
V. Nizhel'Sky1, V. Luzin1, Y. Shutov1, I. Belik1
1State Establishment of Lugansk People’s Republic Saint Luka Lugansk
State Medical University, Lugansk, Ukraine
Objective: To test the effects of Astragalus tinctura on the proximal
epiphyseal cartilages of the humeri in juvenile rats exposed to
formaldehyde vapors.
Methods: 72 month-old rats with body weight of 130-150 g were used.
Animals were distributed into three groups as follows: group1 comprised
intact animals, group 2 consisted of the animals exposed to formaldehyde
vapors in concentration 2.766 mg/m3 60 min everyday. Animals of the
group 3 were exposed to formaldehyde vapors and received A. tinctura by
oral gavage at 100 mg/kg of body weight daily Observation terms were
10, 20, 30, 60, and 90 d. Animals of the group 3 were withdrawn from the
experiment only 10th and the 30th day. HE stained sections of the
proximal epiphyses of the humeri were photographed under the light
microscope and images were used for histomorphometry. The data
obtained were analyzed with the use of variation statistics methods.
Results: In the first group primary spongiosa share decreased as
compared to the control animals in the period from the 10th to the 90th
day of observation by 3.93%, 4.34%, 4.74%, 6.83%, and 7.35%
respectively. Osteogenic zone narrowed in the period from the 20th to
the 90th day by 4.38%, 7.06%, 8.44%, and 9.23%. Number of osteoblasts
in this period also decreased by 4.21%, 4.98%, 7,43%, and 7.94%. After
administration of A. tinctura significant differences between the groups 2
and 3 were registered only by the 30th day. Width of the whole growth
plate increased by 4.01%, osteogenic zone widened by 5.13% and
number of osteoblasts increased by 4.22% (all in comparison with the
group 2).
Conclusion: Exposure to formaldehyde vapors results in inhibition of
activities of the proximal growth plate. Inhibition in this case grows with
time.. Administration of A. tinctura to the animals exposed to
formaldehyde leads to restoration of growth plate functioning beginning
from the 30th day after administration of medication.
P830
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING IN EVALUATING
LUMBAR SPINE DISC HERNIATIONS
A. Florescu1, P. L. Ciurea1, A. F. Vreju1, C. Criveanu1, S. C. Dinescu1, A.
Barbulescu1, B. Chisalau1, A. M. Bumbea1, A. E. Musetescu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania
Objective: MRI is one of the most important modern imaging techniques
used for assessing lumbar spine disc herniations [1, 2]. The radiologist
can detect and characterize a disc herniation and correlate clinical
information with medical imaging data [3]. The main objective of our
study is to determine which lumbar intervertebral disc is most frequently
affected by using MRI in order to ease the decision regarding the
therapeutic approach.
Methods: The study included a total of 32 patients (18 men, 14 women)
between 40-60 y of age with a mean age of 48.93 y. The patients
underwent clinical evaluation and MRI of the lumbar spine. The inclusion
criteria consisted of radiating pain and/or numbness in the inferior limbs
and herniated lumbar intervertebral discs. The MRI examinations were
performed using a 1.5T GE machine.
Results: In the current study, disc herniation was most common in the
L5-S1 (59.37%), closely followed by L4-L5 (46.87%). Disc herniation
was less common at L1-L2 (0.06%), L2-L3 (15.62%) and L3-L4
(15.62%). Disc migration was encountered in 12 patients, with the L4-
L5 intervertebral disc being the most commonly affected (7 patients).
Disc migration occurred on a mean distance of 8 mm.
Conclusion: MRI has proven extremely useful in accurately detecting the
etiology of the radiating pain and/or numbness in the inferior limbs.
Furthermore, MRI examinations of the lumbar spine play a central role
regarding the therapeutic approach of herniated lumbar intervertebral
discs.
References:
1.
Musetescu AE, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2019;70:1067.
2.
Florescu A. Life-Basel 2021;11:218.
3.
Musetescu AE, et al. Rev Chim (Bucharest) 2018;69:1122.
P831
WEDGE SHAPE CALCULATION IN HIGH TIBIAL
OSTEOTOMY BY ASSESSING THE OPENING WEDGE OF
HEMICALLOTASIS USING A DYNAMIC AXIAL FIXATOR IN
OSTEOARTHRITIS KNEE
V. Khanna1
1Dept. of Orthopaedics, Kailash Hospital, Khurja, India
Objective: Medial compartment osteoarthritis is generally seen in the
initial stages of osteoarthritis. This leads to malalignment of the lower
S389
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
limb which in turn leads to further degeneration of the medial
compartment of the knee joint. The management constitutes high tibial
osteotomy which involves the correction of the alignment. Opening
wedge osteotomy generally leads to an empty space being formed which
may or may not be filled up with bone graft with internal fixation. The
base of the wedge depends on the amount of correction required.
However, due to the triangular shape of the tibia, the wedge is of different
sizes posteriorly as compared to anteriorly. This study predicts the shape
of the wedge from medial to lateral and posterior to anterior with the help
of hemicallotasis wedge opening while using the dynamic external fixator
for HTO in OA knee.
Methods: A total of 40 knees in which HTO was performed using the
dynamic axial fixator were taken. Exclusion criteria consisted of patients
in whom the preoperative and postoperative X-rays were not in the same
rotation. Inclusion criteria consisted of patients in whom the posterior
slope did not significantly change in the postoperative X-rays as
compared to the preoperative X-rays. This led to the inclusion of 32 X-
rays in this study. The wedge opening was calculated in the anterior
surface and the maximum opening of the osteotomy in the lateral and
AP view X-rays. This was then compared to the width of the tibia to find
out any correlation between the same.
Results: In the 32 X-rays it was seen that the opening of the anterior
cortex was not significant as compared to the maximum opening of the
wedge. There was no correlation between the width of the tibia and the
difference in wedge opening. There was no significant change in the
posterior slope of the proximal tibia in the postop as compared to the
preop X-rays.
Conclusion: This study gives a great insight into the shape of the wedge
opening in the HTO tibia. The wedge should be maximum at the medial
cortex and should be sloping laterally and anteriorly. However, the
sample size is small and large scale studies are required for the validation
of this study.
P832
D I S T R I B U T I O N
O F
D U A L - E N E R G Y
X - R A Y
ABSORPTIOMETRY MACHINES IN IRAN
M. Sanjari1, F. Hajivalizadeh2, K. Khalagi1, N. Fahimfar1, S. Mohseni3,
A. Raeisi4, B. Larijani5, A. Ostovar1
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
2Musculoskeletal Disease Dept., Center for Non-Communicable
Diseases Prevention and Control, Ministry of Health of Iran, Ministry
of Health & Medical, Tehran, 3Radiation Medicine Engineering Dept.,
Shahid Beheshti University, GC, Tehran, 4School of Medicine, Shiraz
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 5Endocrinology and
Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Objective: According to the osteoporosis guidelines, measuring BMD is
the main method of osteoporosis diagnosis. This study aims to investigate
the distribution of DXA machines in the provinces of Iran and their
inequality based on the socio-economic development status of the
provinces.
Methods: All public and private clinics with DXA machines were
identified across the country and the number of standard DXA machines
was counted. Then, the number of standard devices per one million
populations over 50 years was calculated by province. To investigate
inequality in the distribution of DXA machines between the provinces,
the concentration index (CI) was calculated. For this purpose, we plotted
the cumulative proportion of the number of DXA machines per 1 million
>50 y population of each province against the cumulative proportion of
the socioeconomic rank of the provinces (poor to rich) (1).
Results: There were 299 standard DXA machines across the country. Of
these, 58 (19.4%) of machines were available in public clinics and 243
(81.3%) were in the clinics located in the capital city of the provinces. The
distribution of DXA machines in Iran is illustrated in Figure 1. The CI of
the distribution of DXA machines between the provinces was estimated
as 0.13, 95%CI: (0.005-0.25) (Figure 2).
Conclusion: DXA machines are not evenly available in most parts of
Iran. More machines are needed to improve access to osteoporosis
diagnostic services in remote areas.
Figure 1. Distribution of DXA machines in Iran.
Figure 2. Lorenz curve; the cumulative proportion of number of DXA
machines per million 50> years population vs. the cumulative proportion
of the socioeconomic rank of the provinces (low to high).
P833
OCCURRENCE OF NEW FRACTURES DURING TREATMENT
WITH ALENDRONIC ACID IN SEVERE OSTEOPOROSIS
H. El Moutaouakil1, K. Nassar1, S. Janani1
1Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Dept. of Rheumatology, Casablanca,
Morocco
Objective: Alendronate is one of the drugs that has shown statistically
significant efficacy in reducing the number of fractures in women after
menopause. Its mechanism of action is based on the inhibition of
osteoclasts, and on bone turnover. However, apart from generally
tolerated gastrointestinal disturbances, the occurrence of fractures during
treatment with alendronic acid remains rare. We report a series of 4
patients who had a fracture under alendronic acid.
S390
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Methods: Retrospective, descriptive study conducted in the
rheumatology department of the Ibn Rochd hospital university over a
period of 5 y from 2015 to January 2020, on patients in whom an
osteoporotic fracture occurred during treatment with alendronic acid.
Before retaining the patients, we had excluded all fractures that had
occurred with other antiosteoporotics, and those who had not presented
any fractures during the treatment sequence.
Results: Out of a total of 1200 files used, 4 patients were identified. The
mean age was 72.5 (±4.12), a history of personal fracture was noted in ¾
of the patients, the fractures were distributed as follows: a wrist fracture in
3 patients, a fracture of the upper extremity of the femur occurred
bilaterally in one patient, with a mean time to onset of 2.5 y. A history
of fracture in a 1st-degree relative was not found in any patient,
osteoporosis was postmenopausal in 1 case, cortisone in 1 case, iatrogenic
in 1 case, and senile in 1 case. The vitamin D level was low in all patients
despite the correction. A T-score for the L1-L4 lumbar spine was on
average -3.525 (±0.22), and for the femoral neck at -2.675 (±1.004).
Treatment with alendronic acid was started in all patients, with a mean
duration of 75 months (6.25 y), a vertebral fracture occurred in two
patients and a wrist fracture in two patients during follow-up, a change
of treatment towards zoledronic acid was carried out in two patients,
towards denosumab in a patient after ineffectiveness of zoledronic acid.
The cause of the fracture was poor adherence to treatment in one patient,
the added risk factor for osteoporosis in two patients.
Conclusion: Fractures added during treatment with alendronic acid are
rare, but they should be kept in mind, given the difficulty and complexity
of their management. It is first necessary to look for the causes of fractures
before attributing them to treatment. Adherence to treatment, regular
monitoring and prevention of falls remain the most important preventive
measures in case of osteoporosis.
P834
USE OF ELECTRONIC MEDIA AS AN OPTION FOR
CONTINUING MEDICAL CARE IN A FRACTURE LIASON
SERVICE DURING COVID-19 CONTINGENCY
F. Torres-Naranjo1, D. F. Solórzano-Moreno1, A. C. Guzmán-Rico1, M.
C. Casanova-Munguía1
1Centro de Investigación Ósea y de la Composición Corporal, CIO,
Guadalajara, Mexico
Objective: Infection by SARS-Cov-2 (COVID-19) has affected
practically all the world. Health care systems were overwhelmed and
were issued general recommendations urging people to avoid hospitals
and doctor's offices unless strictly necessary. These measures represented
a challenge to provide continuity of health care for Fracture Liaison
Services (FLS). Some pragmatic adaptations were proposed for
continuing delivery of medical attention, including telemedicine. The
primary objective of this study was to assess the feasibility of telehealth
videoconferencing (TVC) as a media for medical consultations of
previously functional and adherent patients in an urban-based FLS during
the COVID pandemic. Secondary objectives were to estimate the utility
of TVC to achieve continuity of treatment and evaluate the satisfaction
with the medical care provided.
Methods: Functional and adherent patients with at least 6 months in
treatment were monitored using a mobile device-based videoconference
platform, the proportion of successful connection evaluated feasibility.
Patient perception of usefulness, ease of use, effectiveness, reliability,
and satisfaction were evaluated using the Telehealth Usability
Questionnaire (TUQ).
Results: 100 sequential FLS patients taken from the database were
monitored through a teleconferencing platform; in 87% of the patients,
it was feasible to conduct a successful monitoring consultation. However,
40% of the cases required the support of caregivers to carry out the task.
Usefulness, ease of use, effectiveness, reliability, and satisfaction were
highly rated using the Telehealth Usability Questionnaire (TUQ), with
most patients agreeing to continue treatment.
Conclusion: Based on our observations, the use of electronic media is a
feasible option for successful health interactions with previously
functional and adherent patients in an urban fracture liaison service
setting during a health contingency.
P835
APPLICATION OF A DIPOTASSIUM PHOSPHATE PHANTOM
FOR ASYNCHRONOUS CALIBRATION QCT
Z. Artyukova1, A. Petraikin1, A. Smorchkova1, E. Akhmad1, D.
Semenov1, L. Nisovtsova1, M. Lobanov1
1Research and Practical Clinical Center for Diagnostics and Telemedicine
Technologies, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To develop an asynchronous calibration QCT method that
employs a dipotassium phosphate phantom (PHK), and to compare the
changes in BMD of the vertebrae with the data from the asynchronous
calibration QCT method used in routine clinical practice.
Methods. The study was conducted using a 64-slice CT scanner. BMD
was evaluated using two methods: 1) Asynchronous calibration QCT
processed by the QCT Mindways software 2) QCT-PHK using the
PHK phantom. Both methods measured BMD values for L1-L2
vertebrae.
Methods: The first method was applied in accordance with the
manufacturer's guidelines. The BMD values were measured in the spongy
substance of the human vertebrae in the 3-dimensional region of interest.
The CT scanner was calibrated monthly using the Model 4 asynchronous
phantom, following the manufacturer's recommendations. The second
method was based on the in-house PHK phantom that imitated the lumbar
spine. The phantom contained “vertebrae” filled with K2HPO4 in various
concentrations, representing the normal/osteopenia/osteoporosis values,
respectively. Paraffin patches were used to simulate the fat. Similar to
QCT, we picked a region of interest that corresponded to the spongy
layer. The resulting HU values were converted into BMD using the linear
calibration obtained from the PHK phantom scans.
Results: The statistical comparison of the patient's vertebrae BMD using
the QCT and QCT-PHK methods yielded a significant Pearson linear
correlation R2=0.977 (p<0.05). The Bland-Altman plot shows the lack
of correlation between the difference in measured values and the average
BMD. Also, it was observed that the positive systematic BMD bias of
+4.50 mg/ml in QCT, may be attributed to the differences in phantom
configurations. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed that the difference
for the breakdown into the normal/osteopenia/osteoporosis groups using
the ACR criteria for both methods turned out unreliable after the
adjustment for the systematic bias.
Conclusion: The results of the BMD measurement using the in-house
asynchronous calibration QCT-PHK method correlate well with that of
the QCT Mindways. The developed method could be used for
opportunistic screening for osteoporosis, and AI-assisted automated
detection of BMD.
P836
FAVORABLE OUTCOME OF PAGET’S DISEASE OF THE
BONE AFTER 4 YEARS OF DISCONTINUATON OF ORAL
BISPHOSPHONATE THERAPY
R. I. Rosca1, A. S. Dumitrascu1, S. Vladoiu1, A. Goldstein1, A. M.
Arnautu1, D. M. Tilici1, C. A. Nacea1, R. Danciulescu Miulescu1
1Endocrinology - National Institute of Endocrinology C.I. Parhon,
Bucharest, Romania
Objective: Paget’s disease of the bone (PDB) represents a benign skeletal
condition characterized by acceleration of bone turnover in one or more
areas. The pathophysiology of this disorder consists in an abnormally
S391
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
rapid bone resorption followed by osteoblast overactivity resulting in an
abnormal, fragile, disorganized bone. We present a case of asymptomatic
PDB presented in an endocrinology department for another endocrine
disorder. Bone was evaluated using plain radiographs, computed
tomography, radionuclide bone scan with 99mTc-HDP and DXA. The
informed consent was obtained.
Case report: A 50-year-old female first presented in our clinic in 2015
for examining a thyroid nodule. Biochemical examination showed a
serum total alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 266 u/L (normal 38-105 u/l),
normal thyroid biochemical profile and an enlarged thyroid gland with a
benign nodule of 8/4 mm. Repeated evaluations showed a dynamic
increase in ALP values 266 u/l to 375 u/l indicating possible PDB.
Imaging showed: multiple osteolytic lesions of the L4 vertebrae, bilateral
hip bone, greater trochanter and left femur alternating with areas of bone
sclerosis, cortical thickening of the femoral bone, cranial vault thickening.
Whole body scan revealed: increased uptake in the skull, spine, sternum,
pelvis, left femur and bilateral tibia. Biochemical markers of bone
resorption - CrossLaps 1.31 ng/ml (normal 0.162-0.436 ng/ml) and bone
formation - osteocalcin 45.95 ng/ml (normal 11-43 ng/ml ) were elevated.
DXA of the pelvic bones showed unilaterally elevated left hip BMD and a
T-score of 3.5 DS. Active multiostotic PDB was confirmed and oral
bisphosphonate therapy with 35 mg risedronate 6 d/week for 2 months
was initiated, along with combined oral vitamin D and calcium
supplements. We have been following this patient for 4 y during which
biochemical and radiological remission was achieved.
Conclusion: Many patients with Paget's disease of bone are
asymptomatic, and the disease is discovered accidentally during check-
ups for other conditions. Asymptomatic patients with active disease
should be treated especially if they are at risk of further complications.
Treatment with bisphosphonates showed evidence of remission for at
least 3 y requiring constant follow-up every 6 months.
P837
THE ASSOCIATION OF OSTEOSARCOPENIA AND WHO
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK SCORES IN THE ELDERLY
POPULATION: RESULTS FROM BUSHEHR ELDERLY
HEALTH (BEH) PROGRAM
N. Fahimfar1, G. Shafiee2, S. Gharibzadeh3, M. Sanjari1, K. Khalaji1, R.
Heshmat2, I. Nabipour4, B. Larijani5, A. Raeisi6, A. Ostovar1
1Osteoporosis Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
2Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, 3Dept. of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Research Centre for
Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases, Pasteur Institute of Iran,
Tehran, 4The Persian Gulf Marine Biotechnology Research Center, The
Persian Gulf Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Bushehr University
of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, 5Endocrinology and Metabolism Research
Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 6School of Medicine,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran
Objective: There are some reports on the association of cardiovascular
disease (CVD) with both osteoporosis and sarcopenia. This study aimed
to explore the association between a newly developed CVD risk score and
osteosarcopenia in the elderly population.
Methods: Male participants of the second phase of the BEH program
were included in this analysis. Osteosarcopenia was defined as having
both osteopenia/osteoporosis and sarcopenia. The CVD risk was defined
as the 10-y risk for major cardiovascular events estimated using the lab-
based version of the WHO updates Cardiovascular Risk Charts. The
participants were considered high risk if the CVD risk was ≥20%. The
estimated risks were compared in men with and without osteosarcopenia.
Results: In all, 2392 participants (1161 men) with a mean age of 69.3
(±6.3) y were studied. The median (IQR) CVD risks were 0.340 (0.2142)
and 0.230 (0.128) in men with and without osteosarcopenia, respectively
(P<0.001). In women, the corresponding values were 0.260 (0.148) and
0.208 (0.138) in individuals with and without osteosarcopenia,
respectively (P<0.001). The proportion of individuals with high CVD
risk were higher among the participants with osteosarcopenia compared
to those without osteosarcopenia in both men and women (Table).
Conclusion: This study displayed a significant association between
WHO CVD risk score and osteosarcopenia. Further studies are required
to investigate common pathways of cardiovascular and musculoskeletal
systems.
Table. The prevalence of high-risk population for CVD in the
osteosarcopenic and nonosteosarcopenic elderly population.
Osteosarcopenia
+
Osteosarcopenia
-
P-value
CVD High-risk
population
(%)*
Women 70.7
53.6
<0.001
Men
87.6
63.9
<0.001
*High-risk was defined as having the CVD risk score≥of 0.20
P838
VARIATIONS IN BMD DEPENDING ON AGE AND GENDER,
BASED ON DXA DATA FROM AN OUTPATIENT CITY CLINIC
OF MEGAPOLIS
A. Petraikin1, Z. Artyukova1, F. Petraikin2, A. Smorchkova1, N.
Kudryavtsev1, Y. Vasilev1, A. Vladzymyrskyy1
1Research and Practical Clinical Center for Diagnostics and Telemedicine
Technologies, 2Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the distribution patterns for male/female patients
with osteopenia/osteoporosis, who underwent DXA in one of the
outpatient clinics of Moscow. To compare the age distribution for femur
BMD with NHANESIII.
Methods: We analyzed the studies from the DXA database (Lunar
Prodigy Advance) available in the outpatient clinic of Moscow
(population coverage: 250,000 patients). 5781 patients were selected after
the screening (448 males; 20-92 y.o.; >50: 79.3% and 5333 females 20-
93 y.o.; >50: 91.7%). This paper is based solely on original studies. BMD
and T-scores were evaluated for the following sites: femoral neck (FN),
total hip (TH), and spine L1-4 (SP). Precision and accuracy were
estimated on a one-off basis using an in-house PHantom Kalium (for
fat/no fat conditions is 0.83/0.85% and 4.94/-1.17%). Age distribution
for femur BMD (FN,TH) was compared to NHANESIII following the
Hologic-Lunar conversion.
Results: According to the WHO diagnostic criteria and based on the
measurements of all sites in patients, the occurrence of osteoporosis/
osteopenia was 8.8%/48.2% in men and 27.3%/51.2% in women. The
acquired data were adjusted for the age distribution in the general
population. The dependence between BMD and the patients’ age was
compared against the NHANES III data (mean relative BMD values were
calculated). For the 20-50 y.o. patients the FN/TH in men:-7.4/-6.9%; in
women:-8.3/-5.8%. The differences were significant (p<0.05) across all
the comparisons. For the >50 y.o. interval, FN/TH in men:-1.3/-0.17%; in
women: 1.4/5.9%. The differences were significant (p<0.05) only for TH
in female patients. This cohort comprises most of the studied patients, so
the BMD age distribution structure seems to closely resemble that of the
general population.
Conclusion: The analysis of the DXA database of the outpatient city
clinic revealed that in patients over 50 y.o. the occurrence of
osteoporosis/osteopenia was 18.8%/48.2% in men, and 27.3%/51.2% in
women, which seems to correlate with the data for the general population.
We demonstrated a positive decrease in BMD compared to NHANESIII
S392
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
(FN,TH) in patients below 50 y.o. which can be attributed to the high
frequency of secondary osteoporosis.
Acknowledgement: The reported study was funded by RFBR №20-015-
00260A
P839
EVALUATION OF THE PLATELET RICH PLASMA
EFFICACY ON PATIENTS DIAGNOSED WITH UPPER LIMB
EXTENSOR TENDINOPATHY
B. A. Bitzidis1, S. S. Spanou2, S. N. Samaras1
1Dept. of Trauma and Orthopaedics, Mpodosakeio General Hospital,
2Dept. of Paediatrics, Mpodosakeio General Hospital, Ptolemaida,
Greece
Objective: We wanted to evaluate the platelet rich plasma (PRP) efficacy
on patients diagnosed with forearm extensor tendons’ tendinopathy based
on patient related outcomes (PROs).
Methods: After obtaining the approval of our Hospital’s Ethics
Committee, from January 2018 to December 2020 we recruited a total
of 94 patients. In our research we included adult patients (18-76 y.o.) with
no known blood pathology who were primarily diagnosed with forearm
extensor tendons’ tendinopathy. All the recruited patients had not
received any other treatment before the application of the PRP preparation
and had a full blood count within normal rates. All the participants had
given written consent and answered voluntarily and anonymously the
Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) questionnaire before
and at 6-8 weeks interval since the ambulatory application of the 2 ml
autologous PRP preparation on their lateral epicondyle. The DASH
questionnaire is a self-administered specific measurement tool which
has been previously validated for the Greek population. It uses 30 items
to measure physical function and symptoms in persons with
musculoskeletal disorders of the upper extremity for the previous seven
days. The scoring system is on a 0-100 scale and higher values mean
greater disability [1]. None of the participants had physiotherapy or any
other additional treatment after the PRP application until the second
assessment.
Results: From the initial group of the 94 participants, 16 patients did not
attend their 1.5-2 month follow-up assessment and were not included in
the final data analysis. In our cohort (n=78) there were 47 males and 21
patients (9 females) have been diagnosed with lateral epicondylitis of
their non-dominant hand. None of the patients developed any local
pathology after the PRP application or any allergic reaction. The average
DASH score was 73 before the PRP application and 36 at the 6-8 weeks
post PRP application assessment. The gender parameter seemed to play
an important role on PROs as females had an initial mean Dash score of
67 and a 44 afterwards. Patients regardless of age and sex considered that
their everyday quality of life was severely affected in case their dominant
hand was affected as they presented higher average DASH scores of 87
and 46 respectively.
Conclusion: According to our data based on PROs, the application of
PRP on patients diagnosed with forearm extensor tendons’ tendinopathy
has a favorable effect on their symptoms and disability. The results are
affected by the patients’ specific characteristics.
Reference:
1. http://www.dash.iwh.on.ca/sites/dash/files/downloads/
quickdash_info_2010.pdf
P840
THE ROLE OF PHYSICAL THERAPY IN THE RECOVERY OF
COMPLEX REGIONAL PAIN SYNDROME IN THE PATIENT
WITH STROKE
A. M. Bumbea1, R. Traistaru1, R. Marcu1, V. D. Caimac1, A. E.
Musetescu1, O. Rogoveanu1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania
Objectives: To highlight the role of physical therapy in patients with
stroke and complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) compared to
conventional therapy.
Methods: 62 patients divided into two groups were studied. The study
group included 32 stroke and CRPS patients who received, in addition to
conventional therapy with analgesics and non-steroidal drugs, vitamin D3
in therapeutic doses, physical treatment involving massage, physical
therapy, and analgesic electrotherapy. The control group received only
pharmacological treatment consisting of analgesics (painkiller),
nonsteroidal drugs and vitamin D3. Patients were evaluated clinically,
functionally, goniometric joint measures, ADL (activity of daily living)
scale and VAS scale was used for pain.
Results: It was found that the study group obtained much better
functional scores compared to the control group, and the pain was
reduced by a percentage of 38.6% compared to the control group.
Conclusion: Early kinetic physical therapy improved patients' symptoms
and functionality was also improved in patients with complex regional
pain syndrome.
P841
BEREAVEMENT AND THE USE OF ANTIDEPRESSIVE
AGENTS AS A CAUSE OF FRACTURES
Y. Athanassiou1, I. Kostoglou-Athanassiou2, M. Nikolidaki3, D.
Mathiou3, P. Giavopoulos4, A. Samolis4, P. Athanassiou5, G. Troupis4
1Faculty of Philology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Dept. of
Endocrinology, Asclepeion Hospital, Voula, Athens, Greece, 3European
University Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Dept. of Anatomy, Medical School,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 5Dept. of Rheumatology, St. Paul's
Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece
Bereavement is a form of severe stress. It may cause depression which may
require the use of antidepressive agents for its treatment. The aim was to
describe the case of a patient who developed osteoporosis and fractures
after bereavement, depression and the use of antidepressive agents.
The case of a female patient aged 52 y who presented with fractures is
described. The patient had a negative family history for osteoporosis. Her
twin sister had normal BMD and reported no fractures. The patient reported
menopause at the age of 50 y. At the age of 50 she had suffered a fragility
fracture of the 3rd metatarsal bone of the right lower extremity. At the age of
51 she had a fragility fracture of the cuboid bone of the right foot. The
fractures were managed conservatively. A detailed history was taken
including all agents administered in the past for different pathologies. It
was found that the patient had lost a son after an accident at the age of 42
y. She developed depression and was treated with antidepressive agents,
including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. BMD was measured in
the left hip and a T-score of -2.6 was found. Alendronate was administered
along with calcium and cholecalciferol.
Bereavement is a form of severe stress and may cause depression.
Depression has a negative effect on bone metabolism and is a risk factor
for the development of fractures. Antidepressive agents, in particular
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may have adverse effects on bone
metabolism and may be related to the development of fractures. Thus,
bereavement and the subsequent depression may adversely affect bone
metabolism and may be a risk factor for fractures. The use of
antidepressive agents, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
may also be a risk factor for osteoporosis. In conclusion, the case of a
patient is described who developed fractures and osteoporosis after
bereavement and depression requiring treatment with antidepressants.
P842
SPINAL ORTHOSES PRESCRIPTION FOR VERTEBRAL
FRAGILITY FRACTURES: THE SPIN-VER SURVEY
A. De Sire1, A. Ammendolia1, A. Gimigliano2, R. Tiberi3, C. Cisari3, M.
Invernizzi3
S393
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Dept. of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Catanzaro
"Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, 2ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Milan,
3Dept. of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy
Objective: Aim of this survey was to investigate the common clinical
practice in terms of prescription of spinal orthoses for patients with
vertebral fragility fractures (VFFs).
Methods: In this nationwide cross-sectional survey, entitled “Spinal
orthoses Prescription IN VERtebral fractures (SPIN-VER)” Survey, we
involved a cohort of Italian Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine
physicians commonly involved in the management of patients with
VFFs in their outpatient clinics. All study participants were recruited from
April 2020 to May 2020, through an email recruitment strategy and were
asked to participate to an online 13-item questionnaire investigating
information on outpatients assessed by the physicians, spinal orthoses
prescription, and anti-osteoporotic therapy.
Results: We included data collected from 126 PRM physicians that
completed the survey. They came from all over the Italian country: 54
(42.9%) were from northern Italy, 23 (18.2%) from central Italy, whereas
49 (38.9%) were from southern Italy. Almost half of physicians involved
in the survey reported to assess >100 patients per month and 14.3% of
participants managing over 200 patients per month. 71 participants
(56.3%) reported a prevalence of 20-50% of osteoporotic patients and
13 (10.3%) reported a diagnosis of osteoporosis in even >50% of their
patients. The 66.7% of participants reported the absence of VFFs in low
back pain patients in more than 20% of cases.
Conclusion: A correct management of VFFs is mandatory to improve
pain and reduce disability in fragile osteoporotic patients. The results of
the SPIN-VER survey showed that most of PRM physicians prescribe
spinal orthoses in outpatients suffering from VFFs, albeit this therapeutic
intervention is not fully supported by evidence, partly due to the large gap
in the current literature.
P843
BONE HEALTH AND ORAL HYGIENE STATUS IN A COHORT
OF BREAST CANCER WOMEN BEFORE STARTING
ANTIOSTEOPOROSIS THERAPY: CROSS-SECTIONAL
STUDY
A. De Sire1, M. Ferrillo2, C. Cisari3, P. L. Foglio Bonda4, M. Migliario4,
M. Invernizzi3
1Dept. of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Catanzaro
"Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, 2Dept. of Surgical Sciences, University of
Turin, Turin, , 3Dept. of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont,
Novara, 4Dept. of Translational Medicine, University of Eastern
Piedmont, Novara, Italy
Objective: To assess bone health and oral hygiene status in a cohort of
breast cancer (BC) women before starting an anti-osteoporosis therapy for
their cancer treatment-induced bone loss.
Methods: In this observational cross-sectional study, we recruited
postmenopausal women with a diagnosis of invasive BC surgery
performed at least 12 months earlier, undergoing tamoxifen or aromatase
inhibitors adjuvant hormone therapy. The following data regarding bone
health were also collected: previous femoral and vertebral fragility
fractures, lumbar spine (LS) and femoral neck (FN) BMD, Fracture
Risk Assessment tool (FRAX®) major and hip fractures risk, and serum
levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)vit. D), calcium, PTH, and
alkaline phosphatase. Furthermore, all participants underwent a
specialistic oral health evaluation, including the following outcomes:
Decayed, Missing and Filled Permanent Teeth Index; Oral Hygiene
Index (OHI), and Plaque Control and Record Index.
Results: Out of 128 subjects recruited, 122 postmenopausal BC women
(mean aged 55.6±10.4 y) were included in the final analysis. The mean
LS BMD was 1.049±0.147 g/cm2, whereas the mean FN BMD was 0.747
±0.109 g/cm2; 23% of BC women had osteoporosis and 52.5% had
osteopenia. the mean serum level of 25(OH)vit.D was 23.9±16. ng/ml,
and 89 patients (72.9%) reported hypovitaminosis D ([25(OH)vit.D] <30
ng/ml). The OHI showed that only 11.5% (n=14) had good oral hygiene
while 35.3% had a sufficient oral health and 53.2% (n=65) had an
insufficient status. There were no statically significant correlations
(p>0.05) among oral health indexes and BMD or vitamin D status.
Conclusion: BC women had high prevalence of osteopenia/osteoporosis,
hypovitaminosis D, and a very high prevalence of mild/moderate
periodontitis and low oro-dental care. This study might be a starting point
for future works investigating the correlation between BC, osteoporosis and
oral health to define a patient-oriented multidisciplinary management.
P844
USE OF THE SERGI EQUATION TO ESTIMATE THE
APPENDICULAR MUSCLE MASS IN THE MEXICAN
POPULATION: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY
J. Morales Vargas1, J. L. Morales Torres1, P. V. Miranda Alatriste2, A. G.
Guadian Moreno1, J. Pesqueira Ornelas1
1Morales Vargas Centro de Investigación SC, León, 2Instituto Nacional
de Ciencias Médicas Salvador Zubirán, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: Sarcopenia is the age-related loss of skeletal muscle that can
result in decreased muscle strength and physical performance. To make
the diagnosis, evaluation of muscle mass is recommended through
measurement of appendicular muscle mass (AMM) and appendicular
muscle mass index (AMMI). In Mexico, access to DXA devices is
limited, so it is necessary to develop new ways to identify subjects with
low AMM. This study aimed to evaluate the concordance between the
Sergi equation and the DXA measurement to estimate the appendicular
muscle mass in the Mexican population.
Methods: Cross-sectional study design. Participants: 5 men and 5 women
residents of León, Mexico. Measurements: height, weight and hand grip
strength were evaluated. A body composition analysis was done by
bioelectric impedance analysis (BIA) and by DXA.
Results: Table presents the characteristics of the study subjects. A good
correlation was found between AMM DXA and AMM Sergi (r=0.971,
p<0.000), AMMI DXA and AMMI Sergi (r=0.90, p<0.000) and AMMI
DXA/Height and AMMI Sergi (r=0.888 p<0.001). Through the Bland
Altman analysis, good agreement was found between the variables
(Figure). The ICC was obtained to evaluate the concordance between
AMM DXA and AMM Sergi (ICC=0.9672, 95%CI 0.8680 to 0.9919),
AMMI DXA and AMMI Sergi (ICC=0.9407, IC 0.7614 to 0.9853),
AMMI DXA/Height and AMMI Sergi (ICC=0.9335, IC 0.7324 to 0.9835).
Conclusion: The findings of this study confirm, in a preliminary way,
that the Sergi equation presents a good agreement with the DXA analysis
to estimate AMM in older Mexican adults. In Mexico, its use can make
the diagnosis and follow-up of patients with sarcopenia more accessible.
Table.
S394
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P845
HYPERTHYROID MEN HAVE REDUCED GLOBAL
STRENGHT OF THE PROXIMAL FEMUR IN 3D-SHAPER
ANALYSIS
A. P. Barbosa1, M. R. Mascarenhas1, R. Winzenrieth2
1Faculty Medicine University Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Galgo Medical
SL, Barcelona, Spain
Objective: Hyperthyroidism is an important cause of secondary
osteoporosis and fragility fractures because it induces bone loss, mainly
cortical. The 3D-SHAPER software incorporates a model-based
algorithm to analyze the bone in 3D from a standard DXA scan, allowing
the study of both trabecular and cortical compartments of the proximal
femur. This study aimed to analyze both cortical and trabecular
compartments of the proximal femur in men with hyperthyroidism.
Methods: A group of 21 men aged <50 y with nontreated
hyperthyroidism was paired by age and height with a control group
(n=21). The BMD (g/cm2) at the lumbar spine and at the proximal femur
were evaluated by DXA (QDR DiscoveryW, Hologic, EUA). The 3D
analysis of the DXA scans was done with the software 3D-SHAPER
v2.10 (Galgo Medical, Spain) and evaluated several parameters namely
vBMD integral total (mg/cm3), vBMD integral neck (mg/cm3), and neck
Z (cm3). Adequate statistical tests were used according to parameter
normality distribution, significance P<0.05.
Results: The mean age and height were identical. The means (±SD) of the
BMD, integral and neck vBMD and neck Z are described in Table.
Groups Variables
CONTROL
(n=21)
HYPERTHYROIDISM
(n=21)
P
Lumbar spine
BMD g/cm2
1.093 (±0.1)
0.981 (±0.1)
0.007
Proximal femur
BMD g/cm2
1.094 (±0.1)
0.973 (±0.1)
0.005
vBMD Integral
Total mg/cm3
359.7 (±55.5)
318.4 (±46.2)
0.012
vBMD Integral
Neck mg/cm3
431.2 (±78.7)
381.9 (±55.4)
0.024
Neck Z cm3
1.24 (±0.32)
1.04 (±0.25)
0.037
Conclusion : This study of men with nontreated hyperthyroidism aged
<50 y showed a significant decrease of the BMD at the lumbar spine and
at hip. The 3D analysis of the proximal femur highlighted the negative
effect of the disease in both cortical and trabecular compartments and so a
reduction of the global strength at the proximal femur, which can be risk
factors for osteoporotic femur fractures.
P846
Relationship Between Frailty And FRAX in predicting future
fractures in Elderly Patients With Acute Hip Fractures
R. Khan1, O. Nonyelum1, A. Nandi1, K. T. Ling1, M. Seegoolam1, M.
Bhaskar1
1University Hospital of Derby and Burton, Dept. of Medicine for Elderly,
Queens Hospital Burton, Burton on Trent, UK
Objective: Frailty is common in older patients and has been associated
with increased of falls and fractures. FRAX is a WHO fracture risk
prediction tool that has been extensively validated in different population
groups. It incorporates clinical risk factors for osteoporosis with and
without BMD to predict a 10-y probability of sustaining a major
osteoporotic fracture and hip fracture. Acute hip fracture patients are
frequently frail with an increased risk of falls and fractures but frailty
scores are not routinely incorporated into fracture risk assessment tools.
Aims: 1. To determine if there is a correlation between frailty and FRAX
in predicting 10-y probability of sustaining a major osteoporotic or hip
fracture; 2. To assess the impact of gender on this relationship.
Methods: A retrospective, cross-sectional analysis of patients admitted
with acute hip fracture to a district general hospital was carried out.
Anonymized data was manually extracted from electronic records.
Rockwood clinical frailty score (CFS) was used to calculate frailty score
and FRAX UK (without BMD) was used to calculate fracture risk. Patients
younger than 60 y and patients with incomplete data were excluded from
analysis. SPSS 27 software was used for statistical analysis. Descriptive
statistics was used to assess baseline characteristics; spearman correlation
co-efficient and linear regression were used to determine correlation.
Results: 195 patients were included in analysis – 49 males and 146
females. Overall mean age was 82.3 y ±8.13; mean age in the males
was 80.6 y ±7.1 and in the female patients 82.8 y ±8.4. There was
statistically significant positive correlation between CSF and FRAX
overall and in the female patients but not in the men (r=0.221; p<0.001;
r=0.481; p<0.001; r=0.163; p=0.163; p=0.26 for major osteoporotic
fractures and r=0.314; p<0.001; r=0.440; p<0.001; r=0.165; p=0.26 for
future hip fractures respectively).
Conclusion: Frailty is associated with increased 10-y probability of
major osteoporotic and hip fractures in elderly female patients with acute
hip fractures but not in males.
P847
INCREASING THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN PATIENTS WITH
OSTEOPOROSIS AND STROKE BY COMBATTING
SPASTICITY USING INCOBOTULINUMTOXIN A INJECTION
A. M. Bumbea1, O. Rogoveanu1, V. D. Caimac1, A. E. Musetescu1, R.
Marcu1, R. Traistaru1
1University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania
Objective: Prolonged immobilization of the stroke patient will increase
the degree of osteoporosis and the risk of fragility fractures. We aim to
increase the quality of life in patients with osteoporosis and stroke by
combating spasticity using treatment with incobotulinumtoxin A
administered focally intramuscularly with ultrasound guidance.
Methods: We studied 34 stroke patients who had a bone density test -
DXA score of <-2.5 SD. The study group, 17 patients, received treatment
with bisphosphonates, vitamin D3 and incobotulinumtoxin A every 3
months. Patients were monitored for 9 months. The control group, also
17 patients, received only conventional treatment with bisphosphonates
and vitamin D3. The evaluation consisted of health-related quality of life
assessed using the Romanian version with 15 items. Fall events were
counted in each patient during the study.
Results: We noticed that the study group received more good scores at
the evaluation every 3 months. Functionality has been improved; patient
compliance with this treatment has increased. The fall events were
reduced to the study group.
S395
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: Using modern methods of spasticity therapy in patients with
osteoporosis and stroke has reduced the number of falls and thus the risk
of fragility fracture, which demonstrates the effectiveness of this approach
in the neurological patient associated with osteoporosis to increase the
quality of life.
P848
B O N E A N D T H Y R O I D G L A N D P A T H O L O G Y IN
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
E. Deseatnicova1, V. Frunze1, L. Groppa1
1State Medical and Pharmaceutical University Nicolae Testemitanu,
Chisinau, Moldova
Objective: To study the presence of osteoporosis and thyroid gland
pathology in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and to determine
their correlation with disease activity.
Methods: A total of 59 RA patients and 48 non-RA patients were
included in the study, with the mean age of 54.2±9.6 and 55.1±10.2 y
respectively. To appreciate osteoporosis BMD was measured by DXA,
using WHO criteria. The presence of thyroid gland pathology was
estimated by TSH, free thyroxine (fT4), antithyroglobulin antibody
(TgAb), and antithyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb). Disease activity
was measured by DAS-28-ESR.
Results: Mean disease duration of RA was 9.6±5.6 y. Mean duration of
menopause was 5±2.6 y in RA group and 4.9±1.8 y in non-RA group. RA
patients were in 89% positive for rheumatoid factor and in 72% positive
for antiCCP antibodies. Osteoporosis at the level of hip was confirmed in
41% of cases in patients with RA and only in 17% of cases in control
group, while osteoporosis at the level of lumbar spine was more common
for non-RA patients in 48 vs. 13% in RA. Clinical hypothyroidism was
reported in 20.33% patients with RA and 2.08% without RA. Clinical
hyperthyroidism was found in 3.38% patients with RA patients.
Subclinical hyperthyroidism was reported in 11.86% patients with RA
and in 4.16% patients without RA. Subclinical hypothyroidism was
reported in 3.38% patients with RA and in 2.08% patient without RA.
Total of 30.5% patients with RA and 4.16% patients without RA had
TgAb, while TPOAb were found in 37.28% patients with RA and in
6.25% patients without RA. ESR (35.5±24.2 vs. 18.4±5.0 mm/h) was
significantly higher in patients RA. Low disease activity was found in
3.39% patients, moderate disease activity was in 20.34% patients, high
disease activity was in 76.27% patients. High disease activity positively
correlated with the presence of osteoporosis and thyroid gland pathology
(r=0.58 and r=0.34, respectively), at the same time the presence of thyroid
gland pathology was associated with lower BMD.
Conclusion: The relationship between RA and osteoporosis was
confirmed, while concomitant thyroid pathology contributed to more
evident loss of BMD. Bone loss at hip level was more characteristic for
RA. Presence of both osteoporosis and thyroid gland pathology correlated
with high disease activity by DAS28-ESR.
P849
VITAMIN D STATUS IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
E. V. Brutskaya-Stempkovskaya1, A. P. Shepelkevich1, Y. V. Dydyshka1
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus
Objective: To study the vitamin D status in postmenopausal women with
primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT).
Methods: We studied 52 postmenopausal women with PHPT (the main
group), average age 64.4±7.592 y. The control group was 52
postmenopausal women without PHPT, average age 62.3±6.287 y in
physiological menopause. Examination: total calcium, phosphorus,
albumin, creatinine, PTH, 25(ОН)D, BMD measurements by DXA, LVA.
Results: There were no differences in the age, height, weight, BMI, age
of menopause starting, duration of menopause in both groups. The level
of vitamin D in postmenopausal women with PHPT was significantly
lower (15.9 (10.8-21.1) ng/ml) in comparison with the control group
(20.9 (16.5-24.6) ng/ml, U=944.0, p=0.014). The vitamin D level >30
ng/ml in the main group was detected in 9.6% cases, in the control group
– 15.4% (χ2=0.79, p=0.374). The vitamin D level 20-29 ng/ml in the
main group was detected in 19.2% cases, in the control group – 48.1%
(χ2=9.69, p=0.0019). The vitamin D level <20 ng/ml in the main group
was detected in 71.2% cases vs. the control group 38.5% (χ2=11.22,
p=0.0008).
Significant increase of the vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/ml) was
found in postmenopausal women with PHPT in comparison with the
control group.
Conclusion: The results of the study detected the significant increase of
the vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/ml) in postmenopausal women with
PHPT in comparison with the control group.
P850
VERTEBRAL FRACTURES IN PATIENTS WITH HIP
FRACTURE
S. Dinis1, A. S. Pinto1, F. Santos1, L. Matos2, C. Pontinha3, P. Rocha3, G.
Monteiro3, I. Neves3, A. R. Batista3, S. Anunciação3, C. Vaz1, J. Ferreira1
1Rheumatology Dept., Local Health Unit of Guarda, 2Nutrition Dept.,
Local Health Unit of Guarda, 3Orthopedics ward, Local Health Unit of
Guarda, Guarda, Portugal
Objective: Vertebral fractures (VF) are the most common fragility
fractures and despite its value as a powerful predictor of future fracture
risk and mortality are often undiagnosed. This study aimed to assess the
prevalence of undiagnosed VF in a cohort of hip fracture patients.
Methods: We retrospectively identified all hip fractures admitted to our
fracture liaison service (FLS) between January 2017 and August 2020.
Spine images and clinical reports of this patients were reviewed. The data
was analysed using SPSS version 27.
Results: From a total of 162 patients who were admitted to our FLS, we
included 90 referred because of hip fracture. 84% were female with a
mean age of 80.4 y (SD: 7.7). Of the 49 (54.4%) patients who had spine
images available for analysis, 26 (53.1%) had a VF on imaging review.
Among these 26 patients, only 2 (7.7%) had previously diagnosed VF and
6 (23.1%) had symptoms suggestive of fracture. The majority (92.3%) of
patients who had radiological evidence of VF were previously
undiagnosed.
Conclusion: Patients with hip fracture admitted to our FLS had a high
prevalence of undiagnosed spine fractures. This highlights the need for a
screening strategy for the presence of VF in hip fracture patients in order
to identify those at greatest risk and offer an appropriate treatment at
earlier stages.
P851
FRAGILITY FRACTURES IN MEXICO: BEST PRACTICE
PROPOSAL THROUGH FRACTURE LIAISON SERVICES
(FLS)
L. Mendez-Sanchez1, P. Clark1, M. Caló2, M. K. Javaid3, FLS Mexico
Group4
1Unidad de Epidemiología Clínica, Hospital Infantil de México
Federico Gómez. Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico city, Mexico, 2International
Osteoporosis Foundation, Oficina regional para América Latina,
Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3The Botnar Research Centre, Nuffield
Dept. of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Orthopaedic Sciences,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 4G Aguilar-Esparza, P Clark, R
Coronado-Zarco, M. K Javaid, F Medina-Rodríguez, L Méndez-
Sánchez, A Olascoaga-Gómez de León, E Ramírez-Pérez, E Reyes-
S396
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Padilla, B. I. Sánchez-Trampe, R Torres-González, J. M. Viruega-
Avalos., Mexico city, Mexico
In Mexico, the fragility fractures (FF) represent a public health problem;
recent reports state rates of almost 2,000 cases for every 100,000
inhabitants with an expected sevenfold increase by 2050 (Clark.P-
2005). Hip fracture cases will go up from 155,875 to 226,886 in 2050
(5.2 to 7.2 times more than those registered in 2005) (Johansson.H-2011).
According to ICUROS-Mx study mortality after FF was 20.2%. Quality
of life after FF is affected significantly (Borgstrom.F-2013). The costs
related with the handling of nonpharmacological low bone mass
(osteopenia), osteoporosis and FF are high in our country; they reach over
5,191 million (MXP) in 2010 and $ 7,575 million pesos in 2020
(Carlos.F-2013).
The Mexican health care system comprises two sectors: public and private,
offers coverage to 82.2% of the 119.5 million inhabitants registered in that
year. An example is Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS) Victorio-
de-la-Fuente-Narváez where the traumatology unit alone will require a
budget greater than 315,000,000 million (MXP) per year as per 2050
forecasts. We show the direct costs derived from the most frequent FF
according to the Group Related Diagnosis (GRP) published in 2017 by
the IMSS with costs updated to 2020 (Gilma.A-2014).
Fracture Liaison Services (FLS) with a worldwide successful experience
for the care of FF patients offer diverse and feasible models enable to
adapt to different Health Systems settings. The aim of this review is to put
forward the possible implementation of the International Osteoporosis
Foundation (IOF) Capture the Fracture® program) in Mexico.
The initial experience in the implementation of the Capture the Fracture
program in diverse Mexican institutions shows us that this program is
feasible of being adapted for being implemented in countries with
fragmented health system such as Mexico.
The fishbone diagram below (Figure 1) lists the barriers impacting the
development of FLSs in Mexico. These barriers include a series of factors
required for an effective and efficient FLS. All these factors were
exacerbated by the COVID-Sars2.
Figure 1. Barrier for FLS implementations in Mexico.
Conclusion: Fragility fractures represent a health problem in Mexico and
in the world. This study reviews and puts forward the implementation of
FLS as a feasible and cost-effective alternative in health institutions in our
country.
Disclosure: MKJ has received honoraria and grant support from Amgen,
UCB and Kyowa Kirin Hakin.
P852
TREATMENT OF OSTEOPOROSIS WITH TERIPARATIDE
F. Alddafari1, E. Tabti1, Z. Zetla1, A. Lounici1
1Dept. of Internal Medicine, Diabetes Research Lab, Medical Center
University of Tlemcen, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tlemcen,
Tlemcen, Algeria
Objective: Teriparatide is recombinant human PTH analog (1-34)
[rhPTH(1-34)] indicated for treatment of patient with osteoporosis
associated with high risk for fracture due to sustained systemic
glucocorticoid therapy, postmenopausal women and increase of bone
mass in men with primary or hypogonadal osteoporosis. This work is to
study the clinical profile of patients with osteoporosis treated with
teriparatide.
Methods: 4-y prospective study including patients with osteoporosis
treated with teriparatide. Indications for treatment are postmenopausal
osteoporosis (PMO), corticoid-induced osteoporosis (CIO), severe
osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is defined by a femoral neck T-score and/or
lumbar spine ≤-2.5 by DXA. the treatment by teriparatide injection 20 ug/
d during 24 months.
Results: we collected 18 patients 17 women and 01 men treated with
teriparatide, the average age is 56 y among them there 11 cases of CIO,
were 4 cases of PMO, 1 case of hyperparathyroidism, and 1 of celiac
disease, the underlying pathologies were rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in 5
patients, one case of Gougerot-Sjögren syndrome, 1 case Churg-Strauss
syndrome, 1cas of Horton, 2 cases of scleroderma, and 1 case systemic
lupus erthyromatoes; 8 patients had at least of fracture, 4 of them
presented fracture spine. As example from our study, patient with OP
CIO with underlying pathologies rheumatoid arthritis the DXA before
treatment at femoral neck T-score <-2.8 and, lumbar spine <-3.4 by
DXA at 24 months of treatment with teriparatide a which gain femoral
neck T-score <-0.3 and, lumbar spine <-03.
Conclusion: The majority of our patients treated by teriparatide have a
severe osteoporosis complicated with fractures; however the teriparatide
can lessen the number of fractures of the spine and other bones fracture
related to osteoporosis, or who have several risk factors for fracture.
P853
EXTRASKELETAL CALCIFICATION AND BONE
DISTURBANCES IN HEMODIALYSIS PATIENTS
L. Martynyuk1, S. Butvyn1
1Ternopil National Medical University, Ternopil, Ukraine
Objective: To study the prevalence of disorders of mineral metabolism
and parathyroid glands function and to rule out factors which lead to
extraskeletal calcification (EC) in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients
receiving hemodialysis.
Methods: We examined 157 adults (58 men, 79 women) with CKD 5
stages on hemodialysis, mean age 51.2±14.5 y from a single dialysis
center. The laboratory investigations included evaluation of PTH, serum
total and ionized calcium, serum phosphate, serum level of alkaline
phosphatase concentrations. PTH level in serum was evaluated by solid
phase chemiluminescent immunoassay. All patients had undergone
Echocardiography examination and lateral abdominal X-ray examination.
Results: Overall, 67 (42.67%) of patients had bicuspidal, aortic valve or
both valves calcification either peripheral artery calcification. Patients
with EC had significantly more prominent disturbances in mineral
metabolism compared to group of patients without calcification.
Phosphorous concentration in group with EC showed 2.37±0.09 vs.
1,97±0.05, p<0.01 in group without EC. Calcium level was significantly
higher in group with EC (2.32±0.05 vs. 2.19±0.02, p<0.05). On the other
hand it was not significant difference in PTH level (574.16±119.2 vs.
520.78±50.40, p>0.05). Patients were divided into groups according to
KDIGO recommendations for PTH levels in order to establish the
association between PTH levels and EC. In patients with low levels of
PTH incidence of EC was significantly higher compared to those with
target PTH levels (31.34 vs. 12.2%, p<0.05). On the other hand in
S397
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
patients with higher levels of PTH in which it was observed more than 6
times increase of this hormone over the upper limit level, incidence of EC
was significantly higher compared to those with PTH within target levels
(43.28 vs. 25.6%, p<0.05). In patients with target PTH levels (2 to 6 times
increase over the upper limit) incidence of EC was significantly lower
compared to those with elevated either decreased PTH levels (25.37 vs.
62.2%, p<0.01).
Conclusions: EC is present in 67% of hemodialysis patients and is
associated with hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Both low and
increased levels of PTH contribute significantly in development of EC
in dialysis patients compared to those with target PTH levels.
P854
CONSUMPTION OF SEVERAL MACRO-, MICROELEMENTS
AND VITAMIN D BY PERIMENOPAUSAL AGE FEMALES
WITH ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION
L. Kezhun1
1Grodno State Medical University, Grodno, Belarus
Objective: To evaluate the dietary body supply with macro-,
microelements and vitamin D and their interrelation with endothelial
function in perimenopausal period women with arterial hypertension
(AH).
Methods: We investigated 102 women of the perimenopausal period
with AH stage II aged 50 (46; 52): group I – 41 women without
endothelial dysfunction (ED), group II – 61 women with ED. ED was
diagnosed in endothelium dependent vasodilatation (EDVD) assessed by
computed impedancemetry during reactive hyperemy test when Δdz/dt
<12% was related to ED. The levels of nitrate/nitrites (NO) in blood
plasma were determined by spectrophotometry using Griess reagent.
The evaluation of calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P), magnesium (Mg),
sodium (Na), molybdenum (Mo) and vitamin D consumption was
performed by the analysis of actual 3 d food intake.
Results: EDVD in group I was 39.2(30.3; 53.3)%, in group II – 12.7 (-
22.8; 0.3)%, (р<0.01). The level of NO in blood plasma was higher
(р=0.01) in group I – 23.4 (14.4; 32.8) as compared to group II – 12.5
(9.4; 21.5) mcmol/l. Women in groups I and II showed verifiable
difference in Р consumption 975.8 (811.8; 1228.5) vs. 875.4 (710.2;
1044.4) mg/d (р=0.04); Mg – 242.6 (217.4; 299.8) vs. 221.9 (181.1;
253.7) mg/d, (р=0.02); Na – 1088.6 (626; 1684.5) vs. 816.6 (506.9;
1081.5) mg/d, (р=0.03); Mo – 39.6 (32.5;57.6) vs. 30.7 (20.1; 42.8)
mg/d, (р=0.01), respectively. The Ca consumption (group I – 496.3
(398.3; 668.2) mg/d, group II – 547.5 (331.6; 612.2) mg/d and vitamin
D consumption (group I – 0.32 (0.16; 1.51) mcg/d, group II – 0.23 (0.08;
1.08) mcg/d) in both groups showed no difference (р>0.05). Group II
showed correlation between NO level and Р (R=-0.28), Са (R=-0.32),
Mo (R=-0.31) consumption, in group I – between EDVD and Na (R=-
0.39) consumption, the level of NO and Mg (R=-0.37) consumption.
Both groups showed established positive correlation between vitamin D
consumption and Ca, P intake.
Conclusion: In women of the perimenopausal period with AH having
ED showed verifiable lower P, Mg and Mo dietary consumption. The
intake of P, Ca, Na and Mg is associated with endothelial function.
Deficiency of vitamin D intake with food was revealed in all investigated
women with AH.
P855
A SCIATICA REVEALING A BONE LYMPHOMA: CASE
REPORT
A. Gharout1, F. Mechid1, H. E. Ouelaa2, N. Bahaz1, N. Zehraoui1, H.
Hafirrassou1, C. Dahou-Makhloufi1
1CHU Mohamed Lamine Debaghine, Algiers, Algeria, 2CHU Annaba,
Annaba, Algeria
Objective: Non-Hodgkin's malignant lymphoma (NHML) is rare and
difficult to diagnose. The primary bone location represents <5% of
NHML. Diffuse large B cell lymphomas are the most common variety,
accounting for one-third of all lymphomas. These lymphomas are
predominant in men with a peak frequency between the sixth and seventh
decades. We report the case of a young women with bone lymphoma
revealed by sciatica.
Case report: Miss K.M 19 years old, with no particular history, was
hospitalized for exploration of bilateral pygalgia which progressed for 1
year accompanied by left S1 sciatica with inflammatory appearance. The
general condition was moderate and the clinical examination found
rachidian syndrome, pressure pain of the sacroiliacs, hypoaesthesia in
the posterior side of the left thigh and a palpable mass at the level of
the upper internal quadrant of the right breast. Biology showed
inflammatory syndrome, regenerative anemia, moderate acute
inflammatory response to serum protein electrophoresis, and severe renal
failure. the phosphocalcic balance was normal and the LDH level was
high (426 iu/l), Radiographs of the pelvis and spine were normal, MRI of
the pelvis revealed bony lesions of the pelvic bones extending to soft
muscle tissue and the left S1 root. Bone biopsy with anatomopathological
and immunohistochimical study concluded in a diffuse large cell B
lymphoma reaching the psoas muscle and infiltrating the bone marrow.
As part of the extension workup, a PET scan was performed, showing
support for multiple lymphomatous locations: mammary, renal, bone and
mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Chemotherapy according to the R-CHOP
protocol was recently started in hematology.
Conclusion: Primary bone lymphoma is rare, the particularity of our
observation lies in the occurrence of this hemopathy in a young woman.
Lymphoma is often difficult and late to diagnose. The patient's clinical
symptoms and multifocal PET scan were already evidence of an
advanced stage of the disease.
P856
BONE MINERAL DENSITY AND BODY WEIGHT IN
POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
A. Fazaa1, S. Miladi1, S. Bouzid1, L. Souabni1, S. Kassab1, S. Chekili1,
K. Ben Abdelghani1, A. Laatar1
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: The variance in BMD is known to be largely regulated by
genetic factors. However, other modifiable factors such as BMI might
have an impact on bone density.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relation between BMD and
body weight in postmenopausal women.
Methods: This was a cross-sectional study that included postmenopausal
women. Weight (in kg) and height (m) were measured for each patient
and BMI (in kg/m2) was calculated according to WHO criteria. BMD of
lumbar spine (L1-L4) and femoral neck were measured using DXA.
Mann-Whitney U-test and Pearson’s correlation test were used to
investigate the association between the study variables. A 0.05
significance level was considered.
Results: 67 postmenopausal women with a mean age of 64.3 (46-91) y
were included in this study. 33 women had healthy weight and 34 were
overweight or obese. In the healthy weight group, 66.7% of patients had
osteoporosis. However, in the overweight or obese group, only 35.5%
had osteoporosis. This difference was statistically significant (p=0.001).
Mean BMD of lumbar spine was significantly higher in the overweight or
obese group compared to the healthy weight group (0.848±0.025 vs.
0.944±0.041; p=0.05). When BMD of femoral neck was measured, no
statistically significant difference was found between the two groups
(0.742±0.023 vs. 0.823±0.045; p=0.2). BMI was correlated with BMD
of lumbar spine (p=0,03; r=0,301) but not with BMD of femoral neck
(p=0,343; r=0,138).
S398
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Conclusion: Postmenopausal women who were overweight or obese had
a significantly higher BMD of lumbar spine. Significant positive
correlation was also observed between BMI and lumbar spine BMD.
P857
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BONE MINERAL DENSITY OF
THE AXIAL SKELETON AND KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
(PRELIMINARY DATA)
E. A. Taskina1, N. G. Kashevarova1, E. A. Strebkova1, E. P. Sharapova1,
L. I. Alekseeva1, A. M. Lila1
1V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To evaluate the effect of BMD of the axial skeleton on the
clinical manifestations and radiological picture of knee osteoarthritis
(ОА).
Methods: The prospective study included 100 women (mean age 59.3
±8.6 y.o.) with a reliable diagnosis of I-III Kellgren-Lawrence stage of
knee OA (ACR). OA duration was 8(4-12) y. An individual map was
filled out for each patient, including anthropometric indicators, anamnesis
and clinical, instrumental examination data.
Results: Osteoporosis (OP) and/or osteopenia of the axial skeleton were
detected in 29% of pts (group 1), normal BMD in 71% (group 2). Pts with
reduced BMD were older (64.8±6.6 vs. 56.7±9.9 y, p=0.002), had a
greater Me of pain intensity, as well as significantly higher values of
stiffness and functional failure (FF) by WOMAC and lower values of
the KOOS index (Table). Associations between the stage of OA and total
hip BMD (g/cm2) were revealed (r=0.5, p=0.01). The Spearman
correlation analysis confirmed positive correlations (p<0.05) between
decreased BMD (OP and osteopenia) and OA duration (r=0.24), age
(r=0.4), stiffness by WOMAC (r=0.32), FF by WOMAC (r=0.3), knee
pain (r=0.3), and negative correlations - weight (r=-0.32), KOOS score
(r=-0.4) and uric acid (r=-0.3).
Table. Comparative characteristics of patients with OA and reduced
BMD compared to patients with OA and normal BMD
Parameters
Group 1
Group 2
p
Pain VAS, mm
50(40-71)
44(25-51)
0.03
Stiffness WOMAC, mm
105(59- 127)
61(40-90)
0.02
FF WOMAC, mm
820(460 -1027)
520(289-780)
0.02
KOOS
47 (34-55)
66(47-82)
<0.01
Conclusion: The high BMD values in the lumbar spine and proximal
femur are more often observed in pronounced stages of OA, and
associations between the OA stage and the total hip BMD are confirmed.
However, in pts with OP/osteopenia in the axial skeleton, compared
women with normal BMD, a more severe course of OA was noted:
greater pain intensity, high values of the WOMAC index and low values
of the KOOS index.
P858
CAN THE TREATMENT OF PHEOCHROMOCYTOMAS/
PARAGANGLIOMAS REVERSE THEIR NEGATIVE EFFECTS
ON BONE METABOLISM?
E. Kardalas1, A. Chatzidafni1
1Evangelisches Krankenhaus Bethesda, Moenchengladbach, Germany
Objective: Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (combined PPGL)
are catecholamine-producing tumors, which are associated with
deteriorated bone metabolism (BM), reduced bone mass density (BMD)
and secondary osteoporosis. Surgical treatment of PPGLS could reverse
these effects and restore the normal bone function. Aim of this study was
to evaluate whether BM and BMD significantly improve 12 months after
successful treatment of PPGL.
Methods: Parameters of BM and BMD in the femoral neck (FN) and the
lumbar spine (LS) were evaluated in 67 patients before and 1 y after the
surgical treatment of PPGL. 50,7% of the patients were female with a
mean age and BMI of 49.7 y and 26.7 kg/m2 respectively. The main
presenting symptom was a pheochromocytoma crisis while PPGL had a
mean diameter of 4.8 cm. Regarding comorbidities, 23/67 patients
suffered from diabetes mellitus type 2, 38/67 patients had arterial
hypertension and 35/67 patients had reduced BMD (27 presented with
osteopenia and 8 with osteoporosis).
Results: At baseline, mean T-Score in the FN and LS were -1.05 and -
0.95 respectively. Mean BMD in FN was 0,78 and in LS 0,84. Regarding
BM markers, mean P1NP and BGP values were 45.67 μg/L and 22.7
ng/ml respectively while mean β-CrossLaps value was 0.55 ng/ml. 1 y
after surgical treatment of the PPGL, mean T-Score in both the FN and LS
was higher, more specifically -0.88 and -0.83 respectively (16% and 12%
increase). Equally, mean BMD in both sites was increased. Moreover,
both bone formation (mean values of P1NP 37.76 μg/L and of BGP 22.39
ng/ml) and resorption markers (mean value of β-CrossLaps 0.39 ng/ml)
were decreased. The rise of the number of patients with normal BMD
values (43/67 patients, +12%) mirrored the positive effect of PPGL
treatment on bone turnover.
Conclusion: The results of this study show that PPGL has an often
underdiagnosed, though detrimental effect on BM and BMD.
Furthermore, this study underlines the rapid improvement of BM and
BMD parameters after effective surgical treatment of PPGL.
Conclusively, the effects of PPGL on bone tissue health should be taken
into consideration and monitored in our routine clinical practice.
P859
SPONTANEOUS HIP FRACTURE IN PATIENTS TAKING
GLUCOCORTICOIDS: TWO CASE REPORTS
L. Franekova1
1Military University Hospital Prague, Dept. of Medicine 1st Faculty of
Medicine Charles University and Military University Hospital Prague,
Prague 6, Czech Republic
Objective: Treatment with glucocorticoids causes osteoporosis with loss
of bone mass and a higher risk of fractures than is expected on the basis of
the measured BMD targeting mainly vertebrae as well as proximal femur.
The risk of fractures depends on the daily and accumulated dose of
glucocorticoids.
Case report: The first case report concerns a 44-year-old female patient
with complicated course of Behcet disease treated with
immunosuppressive drugs (azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclosporine)
and prednisolone at an average dose of 30 mg per day, with preventive
application of calcium and vitamin D. After 16 months of treatment the
patient started to complain of spontaneously occurring pain in her right
groin area disabling her from placing weight on her right lower limb. An
x-ray of her right hip did not show any pathological signs. It was
recommended that the patient use crutches to reduce weight bearing on
her right lower limb. After 3 weeks a healing basicervical fracture of the
femoral neck was confirmed by magnetic resonance and computer
tomography. BMD measurements showed a normal value.
The second case history presents a 59-year-old woman treated for giant
cell arteritis with prednisolone, without calcium due to established
primary hyperparathyroidism. After 7 months of corticoid therapy, she
complained of a suddenly occurring pain in her hip and the inability to put
weight on it. An x-ray of her hip showed no pathology. All weight
bearing was eliminated from the left lower limb. A subcapital fracture
of the femoral neck and avascular necrosis of the femoral head were
established by magnetic resonance after 2 weeks.
Conclusion: Suddenly occurring pain in the hip with no trauma may be a
symptom of a spontaneous fracture of the femoral neck or avascular
S399
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
necrosis of the femoral head in patients taking glucocorticoids, despite the
fact that x-rays and BMD are normal. Eliminating weight bearing on the
affected limb by using crutches is crucial, until the reason for the pain is
clarified by magnetic resonance, possibly computer tomography or bone
scan. The second case history also proves the possibility of avascular
necrosis as a complication of a subcapital fracture of the femoral neck.
P860
BONE DENSITY PATTERN IN MULTIPLE MYELOMA
A. Fazaa1, S. Miladi1, L. Souabni1, F. Rouatbi1, S. Chekili1, S. Kassab1,
K. Ben Abdelghani1, A. Laatar1
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: Several studies show a decrease in BMD in multiple myeloma
(MM), particularly at the vertebral site. These densitometric data explain
the high incidence of fractures not related to tumor lysis during this
pathology. This study aimed to evaluate the bone density pattern in
patients with MM.
Methods: Retrospective study of a series of patients with diagnosed MM
(SWOG criteria) and in which a study of BMD over lumbar spine and hip
sites was performed (DXA test) before any treatment interfering with
bone metabolism. The presence of osteopenia or osteoporosis was based
on a lower T-score according to the WHO classification.
Results: The diagnosis of MM was defined in 44 patients. A study of
BMD was performed in 14 of these patients when diagnosed. The BMD
study revealed abnormalities in 11 cases out of 14 (78.5%): these were
osteoporosis (n=8) including 5 in the lumbar spine and hip sites, 2 in the
lumbar spine and 1 in the femoral site, or vertebral osteopenia (n=3).
There were 4 men and 7 women, aged on average 70.5 y [54-81]. All
women were menopausal. The MM development pattern corresponded to
bone pain (n=5), back pain or inflammatory lumbo-radicular pain (n=4),
or vertebral fractures (n=4). In one case the diagnosis was made at a
systematic assessment of diffuse osteoporosis. Standard radiographs
showed bone abnormalities for all patients with multilevel compression
of vertebrae (n=7) and punched out lytic images (n=7). According to the
Durie & Salmon stage, one patient was at stage I, one at stage II and nine
at stage III. Six patients had IgG isotype, three patients IgA and two
patients had light chain MM.
Conclusion: Consistent with the literature data, our study shows that
diffuse osteoporosis is common and early in the MM. In parallel with
the tumor osteolysis, osteoporosis increases the axial fracture risk. The
practice of a systematic study of bone densitometry at the diagnosis of
MM will identify patients at risk of vertebral fracture, candidates for
chemotherapy and more intensive antiresorptive treatment.
P861
BONE MINERAL DENSITY PROFILE IN PSORIATIC
ARTHRITIS
A. Fazaa1, S. Miladi1, S. Bouzid1, L. Souabni1, S. Kassab1, S. Chekili1,
K. Ben Abdelghani1, A. Laatar1
1Dept. of Rheumatology, Mongi Slim Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia
Objective: Juxta-articular osteoporosis is frequent in psoriatic arthritis
(PsA). Recent studies have suggested that PsA is associated with general
bone density loss. The aim of this study was to evaluate BMD and to
determine risk factors of bone rarefication in psoriatic arthritis patients.
Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study of 23 PsA patient.
Patients were distributed into three groups: patients with osteoporosis,
osteopenia, or normal bone density according to WHO criteria. Results
were correlated with demographic data, disease characteristics and
laboratory blood tests.
Results: 23 PsA patients with a mean age of 55.3 y were included in this
study; 6 males and 13 females. Results are summed up in the Table.
Osteoporosis
(n=6; 26%)
Osteopenia
(n=7; 30.5%)
Normal bone
density
(n=10; 43.5%)
P
Mean age
51,16
58.2
48.2
Sex ratio
1
0.16
0.42
0.448
Mean disease
duration (y)
16.6
15.8
6.5
0.1
Mean ESR (mm)
51
33
35
0.608
Mean CRP (mg/l)
8
20
14
0.187
Mean BMI (kg/m2)
22.2
31
25.6
0.041
Menopause
N=3
N=6
N=4
0.068
Form:
0,356
Axial
N=0
N=1
N=2
Peripheral
N=3
N=3
N=1
Combined
N=3
N=3
N=7
Corticosteroids
N=2
N=6
N=4
0.132
Methotrexate
N=3
N=6
N=9
0.415
Conclusion: PsA was associated with osteopenia and osteoporosis. Bone
density loss was more important when BMI was low.
P862
BMD AND PROXIMAL FEMUR 3D-DXA ANALYSIS IN
S Y S T E M I C
L U P U S
E R Y T H E M A T O S U S
A N D
SPONDYLOARTHRITIS
M. L. Brance1, S. Di Gregorio2, A. Razzini3, A. De Sogos3, L. R. Brun3
1Reumatología y Enfermedades Óseas, Rosario, Argentina, 2Cetir/
Ascires, Barcelona, Spain, 3Laboratorio de Biología Ósea, Facultad de
Ciencias Médicas, UNR, Rosario, Argentina
Objective: Chronic inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and spondyloarthritis (SPA) has a negative
impact on bone mass even in premenopausal women. Recently we
evaluate BMD, sarcopenia and 3D-DXA parameters in RA patients.
Aim: to evaluate BMD and cortical and trabecular compartment by
proximal femur 3D-DXA analysis in SLE and SPA patients.
Methods: Adults SLE (n=13) and SPA (n=15) were included and
compared to healthy subjects (n=28) as control group (CG) matched by
age, sex and BMI. BMD (g/cm2) was measured by DXA (Hologic
Discovery Wi) on right femoral neck (FN) and total hip (TH). The 3D-
DXA analysis was performed with 3D-Shaper software (v2.9, Galgo
Medical, Spain). The cortical BMD (sDens - mg/cm2) and trabecular
volumetric BMD (trab vBMD - mg/cm3) were considered. Data were
expressed as mean±SD and p<0.05 was considered significant.
Results: 13 SLE patients (age: 47.4±10.1), 15 SPA (11 women, 4 men,
age: 53.9±13.1) and 28 CG (age: 50.7±12.1) were included. Biochemical
parameter at the moment of BMD: calcium: 9.2±0.5 mg/dl (95%CI 9.0-
9.5); phosphate: 3.6±0.6 mg/dl (95%CI 3.5-4.2); 25OHD: 29.8±5.9 ng/dl
(95%CI 26.8-34.7); PTH: 26.9±4.5 pg/ml (95%CI 26.3-33.5). No
statistical differences were found among groups (ANOVA, Bonferroni's
multiple comparison test): Right FN BMD=CG: 0.795±0.132; LES:
0.718±0.104; SPA: 0.764±0.122; p=ns; Right TH BMD=CG: 0.921
±0.127; LES: 0.832±0.126; SPA: 0.909±0.129; p=ns; cortical BMD
sDens=CG: 165.4±23.3; LES: 147.8±27.4; SPA: 160.8±27.8; p=ns; trab
vBMD=CG: 194.3±43.9; LES: 183.7±47.2; SPA: 179.2±48.0; p=ns.
However, patients with LES has consistently lower bone parameters
compared with CG (~10%).
Conclusion: SLE and SPA patients has no differences in BMD and
cortical and trabecular compartment by 3D-DXA compared to controls.
S400
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
A tendency to lower bone mass would seem to be observed in the LES
group but a larger number of patients is required to confirm it.
P863
CHARACTERIZATION OF PATIENTS WITH CLASSIC
FRAGILITY FRACTURES IN A HIGH COMPLEXITY
CENTER IN COLOMBIA, 2019
L. K. Hoyos1, A. P. González1, S. A. Rodríguez1, D. F. Fernández1, K. T.
Rangel1
1E.S.E Hospital Universitario San Rafael de Tunja, Tunja, Colombia
Objective: Osteoporosis is the most common metabolic bone disease,
fragility fractures are its most common complication and for many years
it has been a disease that has been given little importance in Colombia.
Aim: clinically characterize patients older than 50 y, with fragility
fractures, treated in a hospital in Colombia.
Methods: Observational, descriptive and cross-sectional study. 139
patients with fragility fractures were included.
Results: The most frequent types of fractures, in order of prevalence, are:
lower radius epiphysis representing 20.7% (n=30), femoral neck 18.6%
(n=27) and upper humerus epiphysis with 13, 8% (n=20); 64.8% (n=94)
of the population was female, with an average age at the time of the
fracture of 73.1(±12.4) y; 56.6% (n=82) of the studied population had
some type of comorbidity, the most frequent being type 2 diabetes
mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, kidney failure and cardiovascular disease.
It is important to note that only 4.1% (n=6) of the patients had a diagnosis
of osteoporosis and only 0.7% (n=1) received treatment, the prescribed
treatment was alendronate. The hospital stay was approximately 4.9
(±5.5) d; only 2.8% (n=4) had some type of complication, infectious
complications being the most frequent; 2.8% (n=4) required ICU
management. 6.9% (n=10) died during hospitalization, while 8.3%
(n=11) died 30 d after discharge and 12.4% (n=17) died one year.
11.2% (n=12) had densitometry one year after the fracture; currently
92.5% (n=99) are without medical follow-up for osteoporosis.
Conclusion: In Colombia, osteoporosis continues to be a silent disease,
so it is important to make medical personnel aware of the need for early
intervention, knowing the behavior of this disease in our population
justifies the implementation of programs that have shown a decrease in
impact on health and cost. inexpensive like Capture The Fracture.
P864
DENSITOMETRIC PROFILE OF THE ELDERLY MAN
S. Miladi1, A. Fazaa1, F. Ben Messaoud1, L. Souabni1, M. Sallami1, K.
Ouenniche1, S. Kassab1, S. Chekili1, K. Ben Abdelghani1, A. Laater1
1Teaching Hospital Mongi SLIM, Rheumatology Dept., La Marsa,
Tunisia
Objective: To estimate the frequency of osteoporosis (OP) in a cohort of
elderly men, then to investigate the particularities of its treatment at this
age.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective, monocentric study of 59 men
older than 65 y. We analyzed their BMD and medical records for risk
factors for OP, signs of secondary OP, complications, and drugs received.
In the absence of a consensus to define male OP and its border threshold
we used the WHO definition as stated for postmenopausal Caucasian
women.
Results: The mean age of the male was 71.3 y [65-92 y]. 46% of patients
were osteoporotic, 32% osteopenic, and 22% had normal BMD. In search
of risk factors: low calcium intake was noted in all patients, 3 patients
were skinny (all osteoporotic), no patient reported alcohol consumption,
32 were smokers (of whom 87.5% had OP or osteopenia), only 3 patients
maintained regular physical activity and they had normal BMD. No
patient reported a family history of OP, and 23.7% had a personal history
of fracture, including 6 involving the upper end of the femur (UEFF). 36
patients and 21 others had either a disease or a drug predisposing to OP.
Therapeutically, 74.5% of the patients were putted on calcium and
vitamin D supplementation and 46% were putted on bisphosphonates
(2/3 osteoporotic and 1/3 osteopenic). During the follow-up, 7 patients
developed new vertebral fractures and 2 patients developed UEFF. One
patient died one year after the occurrence of UEFF.
Conclusion: Male OP is more common than one would think. Even in
the elderly, the search for an etiology or a contributing factor is necessary.
Education of elderly men to reduce modifiable risk factors is warranted to
avoid OP and its sometimes fatal complications.
P865
DATA SUGGESTIVE OF INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHY IN
SUBACUTE POST-COVID-19 PATIENTS
A. Olascoaga-Gómez de León1, R. Coronado-Zarco1, C. Hernández-
Díaz1, K. Zarco-Ordoñez1, N. C. Centeno-Morales1, L. E. Quintanar-
Trejo1, X. López-Megchun1, A. Y. A. Aragón-Hernandez1, J.
Quinzaños-Fresnedo1
1Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Mexico, Mexico
Objective: Identify muscle inflammatory pattern in subacute post-
COVID-19 patients with musculoskeletal ultrasound. To analyze the
association between echogenicity of the rectus femoris and grip strength
in post-COVID19 patients.
Methods: An observational cross-sectional study was conducted in
patients in a subacute post-COVID-19 state. BMI was evaluated,
dominant/nondominant grip strength was evaluated using Jamar
dynamometer; cross-sectional area and angle of penetration of the
bilateral rectus femoris were measured by MSK ultrasound; by image
analysis with ImageJ software, the mean echogenicity of the cross-
sectional area of the rectus femoris was calculated. For echogenicity, a
cutoff point of 130 was established for suggestive cases if it was bilateral,
and suspicious if it was unilateral. Central tendency and dispersion were
calculated for quantitative variables, frequencies and percentages for
qualitative variables. Correlations were made with Pearson's p, and the
chi-square test for qualitative variables. The protocol was submitted to the
research and ethics committee.
Results: 44 patients (25 women, 19 men) were analyzed, with a mean age
of 41.1 y (SD 12.7; range 18-68). The BMI had a mean of 27.29 (SD
5.03; range 68-41.1). The grip strength of the dominant hand was
30.5 mmHg (±9.9), the nondominant hand was 29.2 mmHg (±9.9). For
the cross-sectional areas and the angle of peneation right and left of the
rectus femoris 5.6 cm2 (±2.3) and 5.6 cm2 (±2.1), and 8.4º (±2.6) and 8.6º
(±3.3) respectively. The echogenicity of the rectus femoris right and left
was 100 (±29.7) and 127 (±32.2) respectively. Dominant and
nondominant grip strength positively correlated with bilateral cross-
sectional areas (r=0.478 and r=0.514; p=0.001 and p=0.001). The
dominant grip strength showed a negative correlation with the right rectus
femoris echogenicity (r=-0.459; p=0.002). By echogenicity, 5 cases were
identified as suggestive and 7 suspicious, no statistical significance was
found when correlated with the Borg scale (p=0.38 and p=0.441).
Conclusion: Data suggestive of inflammatory myopathy were identified
through musculoskeletal ultrasound, which may represent a useful and
low-cost tool for the study of post-COVID-19 sequelae. Grip strength
decreased in relation to the intensity of muscle echogenicity in
postCOVID-19 patients. It was observed that the greater the grip force,
the greater the cross-sectional areas of the rectus femoris muscle. The
greater the grip strength, the greater the cross-sectional area of the rectus
femoris was observed.
S401
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P866
ANXIETY LEVEL IN PATIENTS WITH OSTEOARTHRITIS OF
TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT VALIDATED BY CONE
BEAM CT
T. Badel1, D. Zadravec2, S. Kocijan Lovko3, S. Anić Milošević1, I. Savic
Pavicin1, V. Jerolimov4, L. Krapac5
1School of Dental Medicine, 2Clinical Hospital Center Sestre milosrdnice,
3Psychiatry Hospital Sv Ivan, 4Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts,
5Academy of Medical Sciences of Croatia, Zagreb, Croatia
Objective: To determine the association of clinical signs of TMJ
osteoarthritis with patients' anxiety and with the duration of pain before
the first examination.
Methods: From 2001- 2011, a total of 112 patients were treated for
osteoarthritis, which has been diagnosed by means of MRI. This study
included patients (n=53, mean age 47.7±17.2 y; 96.2% female) with further
confirmed osteoarthritis using cone beam CT (CBCT). All patients had
painful symptoms of TMJ, with or without sounds and with limited mouth
opening. The clinical diagnostics included RDC/TMD Axis I and manual
functional analysis of the stomatognathic system. The psychological
assessment was carried out by Spielberger’s State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory (STAI). The radiological analysis by CBCT included an
assessment of bone changes of cortical and subchondral bone of TMJ joint
surfaces. The control group included the students of the School of Dental
Medicine (n=50, mean age 23.8±2.0 y; 76% female) without asymptomatic
disc displacement and OA changes (confirmed by MRI) for anxiety
variables and mouth opening measurements.
Results: The control group was younger than the group of patients
(p=0.003), had a higher rate of mouth opening and a lower rate of anxiety
compared to patients, which was statistically significant. The mean pain
on the VAS scale was 6.2±1.3. Radiological signs of osteoarthritis of
painful joints independent of the body side (njoints=62) included
deformities caused by: generalized sclerosis and hypertrophy of bone
surfaces, erosion of cortical bone, formation of subchondral cysts,
osteophyte formation and bone particle findings within the joint. The
analysis of sounds (average pain on VAS) showed crepitation in 45.2%
(VAS=5.9±1.4), clicking in 25.8% (VAS=6.2±1.3) of joints, and without
any pathological sounds there were 29% (VAS=6.7±1.1) of diseased
joints (njoints=62, p=0.126). The difference in the occurrence of bruxism
(p=0.238) between patients (45%) and students (32%) was not found.
However, a significantly higher anxiety on STAI 2 (p=0.029 was found
in patients with bruxism. These patients suffered pain before the first
examination, on average/median 26±67.1/10 (range: 0.2-456) months,
thus showing a significant association with higher levels of anxiety on
STAI 1 (p=0.045) and STAI 2 (p=0.034).
Conclusion: CT diagnosis is considered the gold standard for detection
of bone deformities because the interpretation of the variable finding
implies the identification of osteoarthritic changes in the TMJ with an
unclear clinical finding.
P867
EFFECT OF GYNAECOLOGICAL HISTORY IN BONE
MINERAL DENSITY IN WOMEN WITH RECENT FRACTURE
A. S. Pinto1, F. Cunha Santos1, S. Paiva-Dinis1, L. Matos1, C. Pontinha1,
P. Rocha1, G. Monteiro1, I. Neves1, A. R. Batista1, S. Caseiro
Anunciação1, C. C. Vaz1, J. F. Ferreira1
1Unidade Local de Saúde da Guarda, Guarda, Portugal
Objective: To verify if gynaecological history is related to BMD in
patients with osteoporotic fracture.
Methods: We perform a retrospective study of patients followed in our
fracture liaison service, from January of 2017 until February 2020.
Descriptive statistics of continuous variables were reported as mean±SD
if normally distributed or as median and quartiles if non-normally
distributed. Descriptive analysis of categorical variables were displayed
as frequency or proportions. It was done a multivariate logistic regression
with controlling of age and BMI.
Results: 72 female patients were included, with a mean age of 76.01
(±10.42) y, BMI mean of 25.77 kg/m2 (±4.76). Menarche age of 13.14
(±1.73) y, menopause mean age of 48.23 (±5.48) y and parity mean of
2.28 (±1.56). In lumbar spine, 47.5% presented osteoporosis by BMD
and 31.1% osteopenia; in femoral neck, 47.4% presented osteoporosis
and 35.1% osteopenia. After multivariate logistic regression (Table 1),
it was found that menarche age over 14 y and fertility years over 35 y
were protectors against loss of BMD. Menopause age ≤45 y showed to be
a predictor of osteoporosis. When we evaluated BMD of the femoral neck
(Table 2), high parity showed to be a protector and menarche age ≥14 y is
a predictor of osteoporosis.
Conclusion: Menarche age has shown controversial data concerning
BMD; this study has shown similar results to those published by Ho,
S.C. Prolonged duration of fertility period and late menopause has been
pointed as protector factors of BMD in diverse studies. Other studies have
shown controversial data about the relation of parity and BMD.
Table 1. Multivariate logistic regression with age and BMI control, in
BMD of the lumbar spine.
Variables
B
Osteopenia
(T-score
lumbar)
B
Osteoporosis
(T-score
lumbar)
Parity
≤2
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
≥3
-0.270
p=0.780
-1.101
p=0.170
Menarche age
<14 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
≥14 y
0.631
p=0.980
-18.943
p<0.001
Menopause age
≤45 y
-1.013
p=0.480
17.347
p<0.001
>45 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
Last delivery age
≤35 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
>35 y
0.924
p=0.357
2.159
p=0.053
Fertility duration
≤34 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
35-40 y
0.983
p=0.341
-16.123
p<0.001
>40 y
1.266
p=0.391
-16.778
p<0.001
Table 2. Multivariate logistic regression with age and BMI control, in
BMD of femoral neck.
Variables
B
Osteopenia
(T-score
femoral neck)
B
Osteoporosis
(T-score
femoral neck)
Parity
≤2
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
≥3
0.27
p=0.986
-5.358
p=0.015
Menarche age
<14 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
≥14 y
-1.253
p=0.336
3.709
p=0.049
Menopause age
≤45 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
S402
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
>45 y
20.829
p<0.001
-3.260
p=1.000
Last delivery age
≤35 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
>35 y
19.112
p<0.001
19.887
p=0.058
Fertility duration
≤34 y
Reference
Reference
Reference
Reference
35-40 y
-22.660
p<0.001
4.468
p=1.000
>40 y
-21.194
p<0.001
1.108
p=1.000
P868
PREVENTION OF THE RISK OF SARCOPENIA IN POST
COVID-19 ELDERLY PATIENTS
R. D'Amico1, F. D'Amico2
1IRCSS Oasi Troina, Troina, 2Dept. of Geriatrics Hospital of Patti, Health
Authority of Messina School of Medicine, University of Messina, Patti
Messina, Italy
Objective: To evaluate the effects of combined drug treatment and
occupational therapy in the basic instrumental activities of daily life, in
physical ability and in the risk for sarcopenia in post COVID-19 elderly
subjects.
Methods: 7 post COVID-19 elderly people (M 3, F 4, mean age 82 + 6)
hosted in an extended care unit were included in the study. The design of
the study included tests performed before and after follow-up such as: 1)
Mental State Examination (MMSE); 2) Geriatric Depression Scale
(GDS); 3) Activities of Daily Living (ADL);4) Instrumental Activities
of Daily Living (IADL); 4) Short Physical Performance Battery
(SPPB). SPPB is a combination of a balance test based on 3 increasingly
difficult positions, a 4-m walking route and a repeated stand up test aimed
at elderly reduced physical ability patients (score >5 and <9) who are
therefore classified as fragile and at risk of disability. The subjects of
the study showed: 1) Mean MMSE score was 23.7+8.3; 2) Mean GDS
score was 13+1.8. In the group 3 subjects showed an ADL score <3, 6 had
IADL <4. All subjects were specifically treated pharmacologically for
comorbidities. Through SPPB evaluation we detected a mean score of 6
in physical ability. The dedicated nursing focused on personal care
(hygiene and clothing): mild help needed, assistance in every phase of
the activity; self-assurance (physical and/or psychological) and risk of fall
due to low vision and walking difficulty; movement (deambulation and
transfer), selfsufficient transfers and supervised walking outside one’s
room. To improve ADL and IADL a 6-d/week occupational therapy
programme was introduced. This focused on teaching patients how to
compensate and adapt either physically and socially. Presence or absence
of cooperation in ADL is strongly linked to the depression level. This
depression is also strongly linked to the evaluation of life quality.
Results: Before and after a 2-month follow-up we detected: 1) GDS score
13+1.8 vs. score 8+1.7 (p<0.01); 2) ADL 3/6 score vs. 5/6 score (p<0.01);
3) IADL 4/8 score vs. 6/8 score (p<0.01); 4) SPPB score 6 vs. 8 (p<0.01).
Conclusion: The combination of drug treatment and occupational
therapy in post COVID-19 patients showed an improvement both in
ADL and IADL. We have also linked the increased physical ability to
the risk reduction of sarcopenia. The occupational therapist approach was
customized in order to make the patients more selfassured and
independent.
P869
COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF BONE TURNOVER
MARKERS IN OVARIECTOMIZED DIABETIC RATS
TREATED WITH CANAGLIFLOZIN AND LIRAGLUTIDE
N. Timkina1, A. Simanenkova1, A. Andreeva1, A. Shimshilashvili1, V.
Timofeeva1, T. Vlasov2, T. Karonova1
1Almazov National Medical Research Centre, 2Pavlov First Saint-
Petersburg State Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Objective: In menopause (M) there is a high level of BR (bone
remodeling), and BMD is decreased. In DM BR is usually low and
BMD is normal or high. In women with M and DM BR may develop
individually. We investigated bone turnover markers (BTM) in
ovariectomized rats with experimental type 2 DM and to compared
liraglutide (LIRA) and canagliflozin (CANA) effect on bone metabolism.
Methods: Female Wistar rats were subjected to bilateral ovariectomy.
Type 2 DM was modelled in some of the rats by high-fat diet
and streptozotocin + nicotinamide. The groups were made: "CRL"
(control, n=7,), “M” (rats after ovariectomy, n=5), “DM” (rats with DM
without Tx (treatment) for 12 weeks, n=3), “DM+M” (rats with DM after
ovariectomy, n=5), “DM+M+LIRA” (rats with DM after ovariectomy,
Tx with LIRA 0.06 mg/kg for 8 weeks, n=5), “DM+M+CANA” (rats
with DM after ovariectomy, Tx with CANA 25 mg/kg for 8 weeks,
n=5). Blood samples for BTM evaluation were obtained prior to
euthanasia.
Results: OCL (osteocalcin) was higher in the “CRL” group (16.97
(14.36; 18.19) ng/mL) compared to the “DM”, “M”, “DM+M” groups.
OCL was higher in “DM+M” compared to “DM”, but lower than in
“CRL” group. OPG (osteoprotegerin) was higher in the “CRL” (12.27
(8.42; 14.65) pmol/L) compared to the “DM”, “M”, “DM+M”. OPG was
higher in “DM+M” than “DM”, though lower than in “CRL” group. OPG
was lower in “DM+M+LIRA” than in “DM+M” (1.7 (1.15; 1.87) vs. 9.1
(6.52; 10.99), p <0.000) and lower in “DM+M+CANA” than “DM+M”
(1.88 (1.73; 3.8) vs. 9.1 (6.52; 10.99), p=0.001). The negative effect on
OPG level was more pronounced in “DM+M+LIRA” than in “DM+M+
CANA” (1.7 (1.15; 1.87) vs. 1.88 (1.73; 3.8), p=0.023). RANKL level
was higher in the “M” group compared to “CRL” and “DM+M” There
was no difference between “CANA” and “LIRA” groups. The highest Ca
(calcium) level was in “DM+M” (2.73 (2.69; 2.89) mmol/L), the
significant difference was in comparison to “CRL”. Ca was higher in
“DM+M+CANA” compared to “DM+M+LIRA” (2.82 (2.69; 2.97)
and 2.64 (2.6; 2.73), p=0.09).
Conclusion: BR increasing in M manifests in high OCL, OPG, RANKL
levels. LIRA treatment is associated with lower OPG and Ca levels than
CANA Tx, which might reflect more prominent negative influence of
LIRA on bone resorption in M and DM conditions.
P870
PERCUTANEOUS TREATMENT OF HYPEREXTENSION
INJURIES OF THE ANKYLOTIC UPPER THORACIC SPINE:
A REPORT OF 2 CASES
M. Baptista1, J. Nunes1, P. Pinho1, P. Cunha1, T. Barbosa1, C. Correia1,
P. Varanda1, B. Direito-Santos1
1Dept. of Orthopedic Surgery and Traumatology, Hospital de Braga,
Braga, Portugal
Objective: Ankylotic spines may result from ankylosing spondylitis or
diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Due to increased vertebral
rigidity, ankylotic patients have higher risk of unstable spine fractures
after lower energy trauma. Thus, hyperextension type fractures of the
spine (AOSpine type B3) become common in these patients. Our
objective is to report 2 cases of hyperextension type fractures in elder
patients with ankylotic spines, successfully treated with isolated
percutaneous pedicular screw fixation (PPSF).
Methods: The first was a 85-year-old male who suffered a minor fall with
thoracolumbar trauma, with no neurological deficits. CT scan and MRI of
the spine revealed an ankylotic spine with a transosseous hyperextension
fracture at T6 level. Surgical fixation was performed, with PPSF of T4-5-
7-8, with no complications observed. The second case was a 72-year-old
female, who presented after a fall from a tree (3 m) with posterior thoracic
S403
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
pain and no neurological deficits. Study with CT scan and MRI showed a
transosseous hyperextension fracture at T5-T6 levels, in an ankylotic
spine, with associated rib fractures. She was treated with PPSF of T3-4-
5-6-7-8, having no surgical complications.
Results: Both patients presented a quick recovery, regaining autonomous
ambulation by the third postoperative day. At last follow-up (3 and 1 y,
respectively), both patients reported no pain or late complications.
Radiographic evaluation shows complete fracture healing, with no
segmental deformities at the fractured level.
Conclusion: The safety of PPSF in the upper thoracic spine has been
questioned and its usage remains highly controversial in flexion-
distraction injuries with ligamentous involvement, for not allowing
fusion. However, the soft-tissue ossification in ankylotic patients turns
these into purely transosseous hyperextension fractures, which allow
complete fracture healing with this minimally invasive fixation, requiring
no additional fusion procedures. That, allied to frequently happening in
frail elderly patients, makes PPSF an ideal option to safely treat these
injuries in neurologically intact cases.
P871
INFLUENCE OF BARIATRIC SURGERY ON 25-OH-VITAMIN
D AND PTH IN OBESE PATIENTS
S. H. Scharla1, U. G. Lempert1
1Practice Endocrinology & Diabetes, Bad Reichenhall, Germany
Objective: Obesity is associated with vitamin D deficiency and potential
calcium malabsorption. Bariatric surgery is performed for the treatment of
obesity with increasing frequency, but may aggravate malabsorption and
increase the risk of osteoporosis and fractures. Therefore,
supplementation of vitamin D (alongside with minerals and other
vitamins) is part of the follow-up program after bariatric surgery. We
present data on the vitamin D status and PTH before and after bariatric
surgery.
Methods: We studied 23 obese patients before bariatric surgery and 25
patients after bariatric surgery. 25-OH-Vitamin D was used as an estimate
for vitamin status. 25-OH-vitamin D and PTH were measured by the
automated methods of Roche Diagnostics (Mannheim) using a COBAS
411 platform. Clinical Chemistry (calcium, phosphate, alk. phosphatase,
creatinine) were measured by routine standard methods. Group
differences were evaluated with t-test and Pearson correlation analyses
were done.
Results: The BMI in the group before surgery was 49.9±8.4 kg/m2, and
after surgery 34.6±7.8 kg/m2 (mean±SD), p<0.001. The age of the
patients was 40.9±10.7 y. 25-OH-vitamin D serum concentrations were
49.9±21.8 nmol/l and 72.7±37.3 nmol/l after surgery (p<0.05). The
physiological range for 25-OH-vitamin D is 50-125 nmol/l. PTH
was 23.2±17 ng/l before surgery and 36.7±19.2 ng/l after surgery
(p<0.05), the normal range for PTH being 10-65 ng/l). There was a
significant negative correlation between BMI and 25-OH-vitamin D in
patients before surgery (r=-0.46, p=0.03). After surgery, this relationship
was not significant anymore (r=-0.17, p=0.41). There was no significant
correlation between BMI and PTH. 25-OH-vitamin D and PTH were
negatively correlated. This correlation was not significant before surgery
(r=-0.36, p=0.09), but after surgery (r=-0.39, p=0.05).
Conclusion: Obese patients displayed vitamin D insufficiency, as has
been described in former studies. The vitamin D status was significantly
improved after bariatric surgery, which resulted also in a substantial
weight loss. Since 25-OH-vitamin D is negatively correlated with BMI,
the reduction in BMI may explain the increase in 25-OH-vitamin D.
However, the widely used vitamin supplementation after surgery may
also contribute to the better vitamin D status.
P872
THE LOCAL USE OF A THERAPEUTIC COMPOSITION TO
INCREASE OSSEOINTEGRATION
A. Sepici Dincel1, E. Ergunol2, R. Orkun3, D. Dayanır4, O. Ekim5, U.
Altay6, I. A. Ozkul7
1University of Gazi, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Biochemistry,
Ankara, Turkey, 2Cyprus International University, Faculty of Dentistry,
Nicosia, Cyprus, 3University of Çankırı Karatekin, Faculty of Dentistry,
Dept. of Anatomy, Cankırı, Turkey, 4University of Gazi, Faculty of
Medicine, Dept. of Histology and Embryology, Ankara, Turkey,
5University of Ankara, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Dept. of Anatomy,
Ankara, Turkey, 6Cyprus University of Health and Social Sciences, Faculty
of Dentistry, Morpho, Cyprus, 7 Emeritus, University of Ankara, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey
Objective: Our study was related to a therapeutic composition of
sclerostin and dickoppf -1 antibody support early bone formation around
dental implants and graft materials in extraction sockets. The dual
inhibition of two proteins secreted within the bone microenvironment
and targeting Wnt/β-catenin pathway modulation which may enhance
the potential bone formation increasing osseointegration and accelerating
healing in dental implantation and bone volume augmentation in filling of
insufficient bone sites, and methods of local administration.
Methods: Male rabbits (3-month-old, weight ≈2.5-3 kg) of five, tooth
extraction and treatment groups were fully randomized among all rabbits
to ensure any bias. Before tooth extraction, the allowed amount of whole
blood was drawn. Comparison of the experimental animals was done
according to the groups (control, graft control, scl-ab, dkk-1 ab, and
scl+dkk-1 ab group of different ratios and time intervals as 2 and 4 weeks.
Related measurements were carried out by using microcomputed
tomography, hematoxylin-eosin and immunohistochemical staining.
Results: Osteoconductive growth was observed. Around the graft
material throughout the extraction area, mature bone tissue formations
in the form of lamellas and partly osteoid tissue areas were observed at
dual usage. PCT/TR2020/050731).
Conclusion: The combination of scl-ab and dkk-1 ab, which are targeted,
used with graft materials in local applications, has the potential to increase
bone healing rate and bone quality.
P873
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE OA SCHOOL AT THE TIME OF
THE COVID-19 PANDEMIA
D. B. Bobek1, J. A. Aksentijevic1, M. L. Mijacika1
1Clinical Hospital Dubrava International University Liberas, Zagreb,
Croatia
Objective: To determine the advantages of conducting OA school in
parallel with classical physical therapy in persons with chronic OA of
the knee.
Methods: We conducted a randomized study of patients attending
osteoarthritis school (OA school) and those who underwent classical
physical therapy in a Clinical Hospital Dubrava. Patients with OA of
the knee were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to the application of OA school
or to undergo classical physical therapy. One year after the onset of the
pandemic COVID-19, patients in both groups were interviewed by
telephone to compare the morbidity and function of were treated with
physical therapy as part of the OA school and classical physical therapy.
The main test comparing the above results was WOMAC. The Short
P h y s i c a l
P e r f o r m a n c e
B a t t e r y
( S P P B )
a n d
T h e
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
(ICF) used to evaluate function and mobility.
Results: We enrolled 100 patients with a mean age of 71 y; 50 patients
were assigned to each group. Baseline characteristics, including severity
S404
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
of pain and level of disability, were similar in the two groups. The mean
(±SD) baseline WOMAC scores were 33 in the OA school group and 27
in the classical physical therapy group. At 1 y, the mean scores were 58
and 60, this is how we established better long-term results of the
osteoarthritis school. After a year without physical therapy (because of
COVID-19) the results of other tests were also beneficial to the OA
school.
Conclusion: OA school is more effective than regular physical therapy at
long-term effectiveness for relieving pain and improving physical
function in patients with chronic OA of the knee.
P874
CANAGLIFLOZIN, EMPAGLIFLOZIN AND SITAGLIPTIN
INFLUENCE ON BONE TURNOVER MARKERS AND BONE
MORPHOLOGY IN DIABETIC RATS
A. V. Simanenkova1, N. V. Timkina1, N. Y. Semenova1, A. K.
Khalzova2, O. S. Fuks1, T. D. Vlasov2, T. L. Karonova1
1Almazov National Medical Research Centre, 2Pavlov First Saint-
Petersburg State medical university, St. Petersburg, Russia
Objective: To compare bone turnover markers (BTM) and bone structure
in diabetic rats treated with canagliflozin (CANA), and empagliflozin
(EMPA) and sitagliptin (SITA).
Methods: 4 weeks after type 2 diabetes mellitus induction male Wistar
rats were divided into groups: “DM” (n=4), “SITA” (n=4) (50 mg/kg),
“CANA” (n=4) (25 mg/kg), “EMPA” (n=4) (2 mg/kg) for 8 weeks.
Control “CRL” animals (n=4) received vehicle. Blood glucose level
(BGL) was studied every 3rd day. Blood samples for osteocalcin
(OCL), osteoprotegerin (OPG), RANKL were obtained prior to
euthanasia. Femur samples were collected for histological examination.
Results: ОСL in “DM” (10.69 [9.97; 11.03] ng/mL) was lower than in
“CRL” (49.1 [47.98; 54.57]). OCL in “SITA” (19.57 [17.85; 24.44]) and
“EMPA” (16.0 [15.72; 17.0]) was higher than in “DM”. All drugs
decreased OPG (6.28 [3.06; 9.99], 1.26 [1.04; 1.88] and 1.85[1.19; 1.9]
pmol/L for SITA, EMPA, CANA). Both SGLT-2i caused more
prominent decrease in OPG than SITA. RANKL in “SITA” (248.38
[220.81; 300.96] pg/mL) and “EMPA” (254.1 [231.62; 284.0]) did not
differ from “CRL” (247.81 [205.36; 289.67]). CANA increased RANKL
(342.86 [280.0; 355.29]) in comparison with other drugs. OPG/RANKL
ratio did not differ between the “CRL” (0.53 [0.38; 0.66]) and “DM”
(0.53 [0.19; 0.58]) and was higher comparing with treatment groups
(0.24 [0.01; 0.45], 0.005 [0.003; 0.007], 0.005 [0.003; 0.007] for
“SITA”, “EMPA”, “CANA”). The lowest OPG/RANKL ratio was in
“EMPA” and “CANA”, with no differences between them. Area of
epiphyseal bone trabeculae was decreased in “EMPA” and “CANA”
(56.3 [50.0; 61.1]% and 52.7 [47.3; 60.7]%), compared with "CRL"
(62.5 [55.1; 71.3]%). BGL was normal in all treatment groups.
Conclusion: Both EMPA and CANA cause increase in bone resorption,
SITA has neutral effect on bone remodeling, independently on BGL.
P875
TBS SCORES OF LUMBAR VERTEBRAE: COMPARISON
WITH FOREARM BONE MINERAL DENSITY
K. Chun1, M. Coco2
1Montefiore Medical Center, Dept. of Radiology, Bronx, USA, 2Coco,
Maria, Bronx, NY, USA
Objective: Osteoporosis is commonly diagnosed using BMD
measurements from spine and hip sites. Patients with degenerative
changes in the spine and hip bones can have falsely elevated BMD
measurements in DXA scans, potentially misdiagnosing osteoporosis.
Low forearm BMD for these patients may indicate generalized
osteoporosis.
Methods: We reviewed a total of 1081 stored consecutive cases from a
bone densitometer for patients referred between November 2020 and
May 2021 for the DXA measurement. Demographics, TBS-score of
lumbar vertebrae, and T-scores from three sites (spine, hip and 1/3 radius
of forearm) were recorded. For each case, the BMD measurement for
each site was coded as meeting criteria for osteoporosis, osteopenia, or
normal bone density.
Results: A total of 107 patients (median age 73 y) exhibited osteoporotic
forearm BMD (T-score below -2.5 SD) only, while other sites showing
normal to osteopenic range from 1081 patients. TBS spine measurement
evaluated using the same bone densitometer with equipment specific
calibrated TBS software. 53 patients median age 71 y) had osteoporotic
forearm BMD, 27 patients having osteoporosis both by spine TBS and
concomitant forearm osteoporosis. Conventional lumbar BMD measured
normal/osteopenia. TBS scores were highly correlated with forearm DXA
(p<0.009). Another 54 patients met the same criteria for osteoporosis in
forearm BMD without demonstrable osteoporosis BMD data either in the
spine, hip or both sites. TBS software was not available for these patients
for measurements.
Conclusion: BMD for the forearm is not generally considered in the
diagnosis of osteoporosis. However, 107 of 1081 cases, or approximately
10%, had forearm BMD alone in the osteoporotic range, corroborating
with TBS score in the osteoporotic range. This suggests that forearm
BMD alone ±TBS measurements of lumbar DXA, may be sufficient to
diagnose generalized osteoporosis. This may lead to increased treatment
of osteoporosis.
P876
TREATMENT P ROCESSES OF PATIENTS WITH
POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS DURING COVID-19
PANDEMIC
A. Kavaklı1, I. Aktaş1, F. Ünlü Özkan1, P. Akpinar1
1University of Health Sciences, Dept. of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Fatih Sultan Mehmet Training and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: We aimed to determine the effects of COVID-19 pandemic on
treatment continuity and habits of patients diagnosed with
postmenopausal osteoporosis.
Methods: Patients followed up from the Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation Clinic with the diagnosis of postmenopausal osteoporosis
were included in the study. Continuation of the treatment and exercise
and eating habits of the patients who received oral and parenteral therapy
were questioned during the pandemic period. Perceived Stress Scale 14
(PSS) values were also recorded. Data was statistically analyzed between
the groups. Significance was evaluated at the p<0.05 level.
Results: 179 patients with a mean age of 68.1 y were questioned. 76
patients were using oral alendronate 70 mg/week. 84 patients were using
sc denosumab 60 mg/6 months. 14 patients were using iv zoledronic acid
5 mg/y. 5 patients were using oral ibandronic acid 150 mg/month. 21 of
84 patients using denosumab were stopped treatment for 4-12 weeks and
8 were discontinued treatment for more than 12 weeks. 12 of 76 patients
using alendronate were stopped treatment for 4-12 weeks and 6 were
discontinued treatment for more than 12 weeks. 4 of 14 patients using
zoledronic acid were stopped treatment for 4-12 weeks and 2 were
discontinued treatment for more than 12 weeks. 1 of 5 patients using
ibandronic acid were stopped treatment for 4-12 weeks, 2 were
discontinued treatment for more than 12 weeks. 51 of the patients stated
that they exercised regularly before the pandemic, and 18 could continue
exercising during the pandemic period. 25 patients stated that they could
not exercise or walk due to pandemic precautions and anxiety, 6 patients
due to health problems, and 2 patients for other reasons. Considering the
continuity of treatment and the tendency to quit; there was no statistically
significant difference between oral and parenteral treatment groups. In
S405
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
terms of stress level, no statistically significant difference was found
between the groups in PSS-14 values (p>0.05).
Conclusion: The continuation of the treatment and physical activity
levels of the patients who received medical treatment with the diagnosis
of postmenopausal osteoporosis were affected by the pandemic process.
It is important to develop new strategies that will facilitate the treatment
and health services for situations that may cause disruptions in health care
such as pandemics and natural disasters.
P877
SPECIFIC COLLAGEN PEPTIDES IMPROVE BONE ELASTIC
STRUCTURE IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
D. Z. Zeggio1
1Zeta 92 srl, Vicenza, Italy
Objective: Investigations in rodents as well as in vitro experiments have
suggested an anabolic influence of specific collagen peptides (SCP) on
bone quality both bone formation and BMD. The goal of the study was to
investigate the effect of 120 d daily oral administration of 15 g SPC group
on BMD in postmenopausal women with primary, osteoporosis reduction
of BMD undergoing drug holiday and food diary control.
Methods: 10 women were enrolled in this study denominated “area test
120”. The primary endpoint was the change in BMD after 120 d on either
the left femoral neck or the lumbar spine.
Results: A total of 9 woman completed the study, but all subjects were
included in the intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis (age 61.2 7.2 y; BMI 23.6
3.6 kg/m2; average T-score -2.61). In the SCP group the BMD increased
significantly (average T-score -2.13 p=0.184). Conclusion: These data
demonstrate that the intake of SCP increased BMD in postmenopausal
women with primary, osteoporosis reduction of BMD undergoing drug
holiday and diary food control. In addition, SCP supplementation was
associated with a favourable shift in bone markers, indicating increased
bone formation and reduced bone degradation.
P878
ULTRASOUND-GUIDED INTRA-ARTICULAR INJECTION:
EFFICACY OF HYALURONIC ACID COMPARED TO
P E P T I D E S
I N
T H E
T R E A T M E N T
O F
K N E E
OSTEOARTHRITIS
F. N. Kesiktas1, H. Yilmaz2, M. Corum1
1University of Health Sciences, Istanbul Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation Research Hospital, PMR, 2Kamu Hastaneleri 3. Bölge
Başkanlığı, Istanbul, Turkey
Objective: Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease which
causes pain and functional impairment. there is no definitive cure for
OA. Intra-articular injections may be useful in terms of pain and
functional status, in knee OA. Hyaluronic acid (HA) and peptide
molecules recently begin to be used. The aim of this study was to compare
the efficacy of intra-articular peptide injection with that of the HA in the
persons with OA. to make the procedure more accurate and assessment
more objective, we use ultrasonography (US) with power Doppler.
Methods: We performed a retrospective evaluation of a cohort of patients
with knee OA, from our injection outpatient clinic, treated by US-guided
joint injection of HA and Peptide. The patients were divided according to
the type of treatment they underwent: group I (N=54), patients treated
with HA (three US-guided knee injections one week apart); group II
(N=35), patients treated with Peptide (once US-guided knee injection).
All patients were monitored for 3 months, evaluating: subjective pain
using a 10-cm Visual Analogue Scale; pain, stiffness, functionality using
the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index
(WOMAC), Lequesne Index and Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ).
Results: A total of 89 patients with knee OA were evaluated (women
86.5%) with a mean age of 57.5±7.8 y. There was no difference for age,
BMI and knee OA degree between groups. All the subjects analyzed
showed a significant pain reduction at the end of therapy and 3 months
after treatment. WOMAC was statistically significantly improved from
baseline in both groups examined. WOMAC pain score of peptide group
was lower than HA group at the 3 months follow up (p<0.05). Other
WOMAC subgroups and total were same at the 3 months follow up.
Both groups had statistically significant HAQ improvement (p<0.01),
there was not any difference at the end of therapy and three months follow
up between groups.
Conclusion: This study demonstrated the efficacy of OA treatment with
peptide is similar to HA. Unique dose peptide injection was cheaper from
three injection of HA and because of three times application, HA was
more painful.
P879
R E L A T I O N S H I P B E T W E E N S A R C O P E N I A A N D
ATHEROSCLEROSIS OF THE CAROTID ARTERIES IN MEN
WITH CORONARY HEART DISEASE
T. Raskina1, I. Grigoreva2, O. Malyshenko1, Y. Averkieva1, M. Letaeva1,
M. Koroleva1
1Kemerovo State Medical University, 2Kemerovo City Clinical Hospital
№4, Kemerovo, Russia
Objective: To study the relationship between sarcopenia and
atherosclerosis of the carotid arteries in men with coronary heart disease
(CHD).
Methods: 79 men aged over 50 y with verified CHD were examined
(mean age 63 (57; 66) y). To assess muscle mass, the total area (cm2)
of the lumbar muscles of the axial section at the level of the 3rd lumbar
vertebra (L3) was determined using multispiral computed tomography on
a 64-slice computer tomograph "Somatom Sensation 64" (Siemens AG
Medical Solution, Germany). The ratio of the obtained index of the area
of skeletal muscle to the square of the patient's growth index determined
the "musculoskeletal index L3". The media considered the threshold
value to be 52.4 cm2/m2. Evaluation of muscle strength was performed
using a mechanical wrist dynamometer DC-25. Muscle function was
examined using a short physical performance battery (SPPB). The
severity of atherosclerotic lesions of the carotid arteries was assessed by
color duplex scanning with the study of the intima-media thickness
(IMT), the presence of atherosclerotic plaques (ASB) and the degree of
artery stenosis. In accordance with the recommendations of the EWGSOP
(2010, 2018), the patients were divided into 3 groups: 1st - 31 patients
without sarcopenia, 2nd - 21 patients with presarcopenia, and 3rd - 27
patients with sarcopenia.
Results: IMT in the group of patients with sarcopenia is significantly
higher than that in men without sarcopenia (p=0.005). The most severe
lesion of the carotid arteries with multiple ASB and stenosis 50% or more
was significantly more frequent in men with sarcopenia compared with
the group of patients with presarcopenia (48.15 vs. 9.5%, p=0.015) and
without sarcopenia (48.15 vs. 12.9%, p=0.013). According to the results
of the correlation analysis, a significant negative relationship was
established between the severity of carotid atherosclerosis and the
musculoskeletal index (r=-0.227, p=0.047).
Conclusion: An increase in IMT is associated with a decrease in muscle
mass, which indicates a more severe atherosclerotic lesion of the carotid
arteries in men aged over 50 y with verified CHD and sarcopenia.
P880
PREDICTORS OF MUSCLE MASS LOSS IN IN MEN WITH
CORONARY HEART DISEASE
T. Raskina1, I. Grigoreva2, M. Letaeva1, O. Malyshenko1, Y. Averkieva1,
M. Koroleva1
S406
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
1Kemerovo State Medical University, 2Kemerovo City Clinical Hospital
№4, Kemerovo, Russia
Objective: To identify predictors of muscle loss in men with coronary
heart disease (CHD).
Methods: 79 men aged over 50 y with verified CHD were examined
(mean age 63 (57; 66) y). To assess muscle mass, the total area (cm2)
of the lumbar muscles of the axial section at the level of the 3rd lumbar
vertebra (L3) was determined using multispiral computed tomography on
a 64-slice computer tomograph "Somatom Sensation 64" (Siemens AG
Medical Solution, Germany). The ratio of the obtained index of the area
of skeletal muscle to the square of the patient's growth index determined
the "musculoskeletal index L3" (SMI). The media considered the
threshold value to be 52.4 cm2/m2. Evaluation of muscle strength was
performed using a mechanical wrist dynamometer DC-25. Muscle
function was examined using a short physical performance battery
(SPPB). The construction of a predictive model of a decrease of SMI
below the threshold value was performed using the binary logistic
regression method. Threshold values for parameters associated with a
decrease in media were determined using ROC analysis.
Results: According to the results of binary logistic regression, it was
found that significant predictors of a decrease in the musculoskeletal
index in this work were the indicators of BMI, a short physical
performance battery (SPPB) and total cholesterol level (TC) (R2=57.9%).
It was shown that an increase in BMI by 1 kg/m2 reduces the likelihood of
a decrease of SMI below the threshold value by 1.5 times (OR 0.657,
95%CI: 0.531-0.813), an increase in the result of a SPPB by 1 point
reduces the likelihood of a decrease of SMI by 3,2 times (OR 0.313,
95%CI: 0.145-0.677), and an increase in the TC level by 1 mmol/L, on
the contrary, is associated with an increased risk of a decrease in the SMI
by 1.9 times (OR 1.914, 95%CI: 1.166 -3.141). According to the results
of the ROC analysis, it was revealed that the BMI indicator has a reliable
predictive ability to detect a decrease in mass media. The threshold value
of BMI, providing sensitivity of 81.3% and specificity of 64.5%, was
≤30.1 kg/m2. The threshold value of SPPB providing a sensitivity of
52.1% and a specificity of 74.2% was a result of ≤10 points. The
threshold value of total cholesterol was> 4.7 mmol / L with a sensitivity
of 56.3% and a specificity of 87.1%.
Conclusion: The results of study indicate the presence of common
pathogenetic mechanisms of sarcopenia and cardiovascular diseases,
which determines the relevance of further research in this area.
P881
BLOOD LIPID PROFILE IN MEN WITH CORONARY HEART
DISEASE AND SARCOPENIA
T. Raskina1, I. Grigoreva2, M. Letaeva1, Y. Averkieva1, O. Malyshenko1,
M. Koroleva1, V. Fanaskov3
1Kemerovo State Medical University, 2Kemerovo City Clinical Hospital
№4, 3Kuzbass Clinical Hospital for War Veterans, Kemerovo, Russia
Objective: To study the characteristics of lipid metabolism in men with
coronary artery disease (CHD) and sarcopenia.
Methods: 79 men aged over 50 y with verified CHD were examined
(mean age 63 (57; 66) y). The diagnosis of sarcopenia was based on the
recommendations of EWGSOP (2010, 2018) with the determination of
three parameters - muscle strength (mechanical wrist dynamometer DC-
25), muscle mass (multispiral computed tomography) and muscle
function (short physical performance battery). Total cholesterol (TC),
triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) were determined in fasting
blood serum by spectrophotometric method. In accordance with the
recommendations EWGSOP, the patients were divided into 3 groups
(EWGSOP, 2010): 1st - 31 patients without sarcopenia, 2nd - 21 patients
with presarcopenia, and 3rd - 27 patients with sarcopenia.
Results: The TC level in patients negatively correlated with the
musculoskeletal index (r=-0.315, p=0.005) and the total area of skeletal
muscles at the 3rd lumbar vertebra level (r=-0.277, p=0.013). In a
comparative analysis it was found that TC level in men with CHD and
sarcopenia was significantly higher compared to that in patients with
CHD and without sarcopenia (5.20 (3.75; 6.00) mmol/L vs. 3.90 (3.40;
4.60) mmol/L, p=0.03). Based on the regression analysis, a direct
relationship between the TC level and the risk of a decrease in the
musculoskeletal index was established (OR 1.914, 95%CI: 1.166-
3.141). According to ROC-analysis, the threshold value of total
cholesterol was >4.7 mmol/L with a sensitivity of 56.3% and a specificity
of 87.1%.
Conclusion: The presence of sarcopenia in men with CHD is associated
with more severe proatherogenic abnormalities in the blood lipid profile.
Hypercholesterolemia is an additional predictor of muscle loss.
P882
RELATIONSHIP OF SARCOPENIC SYNDROME AND
CORONARY ARTERY ATHEROSCLEROSIS IN MALE
PATIENTS WITH ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE
T. Raskina1, I. Grigoreva2, M. Letaeva1, M. Koroleva1, Y. Averkieva1, O.
Malyshenko1, A. Kokov3
1Kemerovo State Medical University, 2Kemerovo City Clinical Hospital
№4, 3Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Kemerovo, Russia
Objective: To study the relationship between severity of coronary
atherosclerosis and sarcopenia in in men with coronary heart disease
(CHD).
Methods: 79 men aged over 50 y with verified CHD were examined
(mean age 63 (57; 66) y). To assess muscle mass, the total area (cm2)
of the lumbar muscles of the axial section at the level of the 3rd lumbar
vertebra (L3) was determined using multispiral computed tomography on
a 64-slice computer tomograph "Somatom Sensation 64" (Siemens AG
Medical Solution, Germany). The ratio of the obtained index of the area
of skeletal muscle to the square of the patient's growth index determined
the "musculoskeletal index L3" (SMI). The media considered the
threshold value to be 52.4 cm2/m2. Evaluation of muscle strength was
performed using a mechanical wrist dynamometer. Muscle function was
examined using a short physical performance battery (SPPB). The variant
of coronary atherosclerosis was assessed according to coronary
angiography: variant A - one- and two-vessel lesion; variant B - three-
vessel lession; variant C - lesion of the left trunk of the coronary artery in
combination (or without) with hemodynamically significant narrowing of
any other coronary arteries.
In accordance with the recommendations EWGSOP, the patients were
divided into 3 groups (EWGSOP, 2010): 1st - 31 patients without
sarcopenia, 2nd - 21 patients with presarcopenia, and 3rd - 27 patients with
sarcopenia.
Results: The severity of coronary atherosclerosis in patients negatively
correlated with the musculoskeletal index (r=- 0.227, p=0.047). In a
comparative analysis, a higher incidence of lesion of the left trunk of
the coronary artery±any other arteries was found in the group of patients
with CHD and sarcopenia compared to that in patients with CHD and
presarcopenia and without sarcopenia (29.6% vs. 20.0% and 13.3%,
respectively). According to the results of the ROC analysis, it was found
that impaired blood flow in three vessels or he left trunk of the coronary
artery±any other arteries was associated with a decrease in SMI with a
sensitivity of 68.1% and a specificity of 56.7% (AUC was 0.634; 95%CI:
0.515-0.741; p=0.028; Youden's index 0.248).
Conclusion: A higher incidence of the prognostically unfavorable variant
of coronary lesions in patients with CHD and sarcopenia was found,
which makes further research in this area relevant.
S407
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
P883
DENUSOMAB PERSISTENCE DURING THE COVID
PANDEMIC
A. Spångeus1,2, K. Rzepecka3, M. Woisetschläger4,5
1Dept. of Acute Internal Medicine and Geriatrics & Dept. Endocrinology,
Linköping University Hospital, 2Dept of Health, Medicine and Caring
Sciences, Linköping University, 3Primary health center in Johannelund,
4Dept. of Radiology and Dept. of Medical and Health Sciences, 5Center
for Medical Image Science and Visualization (CMIV), Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden
Objective: To investigate the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on
denosumab persistence.
Methods: All patients who initiated denosumab treatment at our
outpatient care (osteoporosis/endocrinology unit) between 2016-2019
were included and date of injections were recorded from case records.
Persistence was analyzed regarding 2-y persistence and 1-y persistence.
Persistence was defined as a maximum interval of either 1) 8 months (m)
[6+2m], or 2) 9m [6+3m].
Results: In total 171 patients were included. Mean age was 74.3+10.2 y
(range 35-93 y) and 87% were women. Age and gender distribution did
not differ significantly between the year of denosumab initiation. The 2-y
persistence rate (8-m interval permitted) was lower in patients starting
denosumab 2019 than those starting 2016-1018, i.e., 69% vs. 83%,
p=0.044. No significant difference was seen analyzing 1-y persistence
in the same groups (87 vs. 91%, p=0.410). When using a more liberal
persistence definition, i.e., 9+m interval permitted, no difference was seen
between 2 y persistence, 77 vs. 83%, p=0.341.
Conclusion: The present study indicates that a higher number of patients
got their injection later than recommended during the pandemic, but
despite high pressure on our healthcare system and health concerns in
the general population, no significant influence on denosumab
persistence using a more liberal interval allowance was seen in this
outpatient osteoporosis group.
Disclosure: AS received lecture fees from Amgen Inc. and Mylan.
P884
P H Y S I C I A N S P R E F E R E N C E S F O R V I T A M I N D
PRESCRIPTION
A. S. Shutova1, N. N. Katamadze1, H. R. Fargieva1, V. S. Glazieva1, E.
A. Pigarova1, L. K. Dzeranova1, I. M. Belovalova1, I. I. Dedov1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia
Introduction: Disorders of mineral homeostasis leading to decreased bone
density and fractures are strongly associated with severe vitamin D
deficiency in most people. Currently, the most effective mean of preventing
osteoporosis is long-term intake of vitamin D in various dosage forms,
which are aqueous solutions, oil drops, tablets/capsules and granules.
Aim: The aim of our study was to assess the priority of prescribing of
different forms of vitamin D based on a comparative analysis in a national
study.
Materials and methods: We conducted a national online-based survey
which included 704 physicians specialized in various fields
(endocrinologists accounted for 80% of them).
Results: The largest number of doctors (35,2%) do not have any
preference in prescribing the form of vitamin D. The second place in
priority of appointment (28,3%) is occupied by an aqueous solution. Oil
drops are prescribed in 21 percent of cases. Administration of capsules,
tablets and granules is far behind (10,8%, 3,9% and 0,8% respectively).
Conclusion: Aqueous solution of vitamin D has the greatest
bioavailability among the other dosage forms, that determines
predominance of it’s appointment. Moreover, a lot of people have severe
limitations regarding medication’s intake, such as unwillingness to take
medications in a gelatinous frill - capsules (people adhering to
vegetarianism) or inability to consume fats, which lower the frequency
of an administration of vitamin D in capsules containing gelatin and
vitamin D in the form of oil drops. Domination of “all the same” position
reflects the absence of doctor’s affiliation with pharmaceutical
companies. Thereby the best bioavailability and absence of potential
patient’s negativism determine the leading position of the administration
of aqueous solution among the other forms of vitamin D.
P886
FREQUENCY AND RISK FACTORS FOR LOW BONE
MINERAL DENSITY IN POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH
SYSTEMIC SCLERODERMA
A. O. Efremova1, N. V. Toroptsova1, N. V. Demin1, O. V.
Dobrovolskaya1, M. N. Starovoitova1, O. A. Nikitinskaya1
1Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: To determine the frequency and risk factors for low bone
mineral density (BMD) in postmenopausal women with systemic
scleroderma (SSс)
Patients and methods: 113 postmenopausal women with SSс were
enrolled in the study: 77 (68.1%) with limited and 36 (31.9%) with
diffuse cutaneous subtype. Patients with overlap rheumatic syndromes
were not included. The median age was 59.5 [54.0; 63.0] years, the
median duration of the disease was 10.0 [6.0; 15.0] years. 94 (83.2%)
patients were treated with glucocorticoids (GC), the median duration of
GC use - 10.0 [6.0;15.0] years. Dual energy X–ray absorptiometry
(DXA) of the lumbar spine (LS), the femoral neck (FN) and the total
hip (TH) was performed. Osteoporosis (OP) was diagnosed with a T-
score < -2.5 SD and osteopenia – with a T-score from -1SD to -2.5 SD
in any region of interest. Traditional risk factors of OP were analyzed, and
the search for specific risk factors for low BMD in patients with SSс was
carried out using multivariate linear regression analysis.
Results. The median LS BMD was 0.95 [0.87; 1.04] g/cm2, the FN BMD
-0.78 [0.69; 0.86] g/cm2 and the TH BMD - 0.81 [0.74; 0.91] g/cm2. Low
BMD at least in one region of interest was detected in 106 (93.8%)
patients: OP - in 51 (45.1%) and osteopenia - in 55 (48.7%) women.
OP was significantly more common in patients with the diffuse form
(63.9%) compared to the limited form SSс (36.4%) (p=0.0062). 41
(36.2%) women had a history of low-trauma fracture, among them 25
(61.0%) patients had OP, 14 (34,1%) - osteopenia and only 2 (4.9%)
persons - normal BMD. OP was significantly more common in patients
with interstitial lung disease (ILD) (p=0.0014), with finger contractures
(p=0.0065), positive for anti-Scl 70 (p=0.022) and anti-nuclear antibodies
(ANA) measured by indirect immunofuorescence (IFI) using Hep-2
(p=0.0038). Median level of 25(OH)D was 19.68 [14.31;23.72] ng/ml.
Low vitamin D level was detected in 91.2% of patients: 44.2% women
had hypovitaminosis D, 41.6% – vitamin D deficiency and 5.3% - severe
deficiency (25(OH)D less than 10 ng/ml) with no significant difference
between patients with diffuse and limited form.
In multivariate linear regression analyses the duration of GC use was
negatively associated with LS BMD (b=-0.007, R2= 0.196, p
<0.00093). The following factors associated with FN BMD:
BMI(b=0.007, R2=0.208, p<0.00093), creatinine clearance (CrCl)
(b=0.313, R2=0.213, p<0.00037), duration of postmenopause (b=-
0.223, R2=0.134 p<0.00000), duration of proton- pump inhibitors (PPI)
use (b=-0.277, R2=0.291, p<0.00000), cumulative dose of GC (b=-0.269,
R2=0.134 p<0.00000), and with TH BMD - BMI (b=0.493, R2=0.244,
p<0.00000), CrCl (b=0.313, R2=0.150, p<0.00016) and cumulative dose
of GC (b=-0.219, R2=0.289, p<0.00029).
Conclusions: Low BMD was found in 93.8 % of postmenopausal
women with SSc, among them 45.1% had OP. OP was significantly more
common in patients with a diffuse cutaneous subtype. 91.2% of the
patients had low level of vitamin D. BMI and CrCl were positively, and
the cumulative dose of GC was negatively associated with FN and TH
S408
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
BMD. The duration of postmenopause and PPI use negatively affected
FN BMD, and the duration of GC use had a negative effect on LS BMD.
P887
THE FREQUENCY OF SARCOPENIA AND FACTORS
ASSOCIATED WITH MUSCLE MASS IN WOMEN WITH
SYSTEMIC SCLERODERMA (PILOT STUDY)
A. O. Efremova1, N. V. Toroptsova1, O. A. Nikitinskaya1, N. V. Demin1,
O. V. Desinova1
1Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow, Russia
Objective: to identify the frequency of sarcopenia (SP) and risk factors
for low muscle mass in women with systemic scleroderma (SSc).
Patients and methods: 47 women aged > 40 years who met the 2013
ACR/EULAR classification criteria for SSc were recruited. Among them
29 (61.7%) patients with limited and 18 (38.3%) - with diffuse form of the
disease. Pregnant or breast-feeding women and patients with overlapping
rheumatic syndromes were not included. 17 (36.2%) women were of
fertile age and 30 (63.8%) - postmenopausal. The median age was 53.9
[48.0;62.0] years, and the median duration of the disease was 6.0
[1.0;12.0] years. Muscle strength was measured using hand dynamometry
and “Chair rising” test. All patients underwent whole-body dual energy
X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). The appendicular muscle mass index
(AMI) was calculated as the ratio of appendicular muscle mass (AMM)
to height squared (kg/m2). Physical performance was assessed using a
gait speed test and the Short Battery of physical performance (SPPB).
Sarcopenia (SP) was diagnosed according to the updated EWGSOP2
criteria [1]. Associations between AMM, AMI and SSc disease
characteristics were analyzed in univariate linear regression analysis.
Results. 10 (21.3%) women with SSc were classified as having SP (6,4% -
severe sarcopenia). Among them 6 (33.3%) patients with diffuse and 4
(13.8%) with limited form of the disease (p > 0.05). Patients with SP did
not differ from patients without SP in age, BMD and the frequency of OP,
number of fractures, skinscore, positivityof Scl 70 and ACA, the nutritional
status assessed by MNA-SF. At the same time, they were significantly more
likely to fall (p=0.039), they had a lower BMI (p=0.044), a longer disease
duration (p=0.039) and a higher cumulative dose of glucocorticoids (GC)
(p=0.045).Univariate linear regression analysis revealed that AMM and
AMI were positively associated with BMI (b=0.44, p<0.05 and b=0.15,
p<0.01, respectively) and MNA-SF (b=0.37, p<0.01 and b=0.11, p=0.02,
respectively),andnegatively-withthe Rodmanskinscore (b=-0.17, p=0.04
and b= -0.06, p=0.01, respectively) and falls during the past year (b=-
2.54; P=0.02 and b= -0.96, P<0.01, respectively). Additionally, a
negative association with the cumulative dose of glucocorticoids (GC)
was found for A M (b <-0.01, p=0.04).
Conclusions: SP was diagnosed in 23.1% of women with SSc with no
significant difference between the limited and diffuse forms of the
disease. BMI and the nutritional status positivity associated with AMM
and AMI, while Rodman skin score and a history of falling in the past
year negatively. A high cumulative dose of GC negatively affected the
AMM value. Although age is the main risk factor for sarcopenia in the
general population, it did not differ between SSc patients with low and
normal AMM and AMI in our study.
1.
Cruz-Jentoft AJ, Bahat G, Bauer J, et al. Sarcopenia: revised
European consensus on definition and diagnosis. Age Ageing.
2019 Jan 1;48(1):16-31. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afy169.
P888
DEVELOPMENT OF A CLINICAL PREDICTION TOOL FOR
P R E O P E R A T I V E
P R E D I C T I O N
O F
1 - Y E A R
P O S T O PE R A T I V E F U N C T I O N A L OU T C OM E O F
INTERTROCHANTERIC FRACTURE
N. Adulkasem 1, P. Phinyo2, 3, 4, J. Khorana2, 5, D. Preuksakorn1, 4, T.
Apivatthakakul1
1Department of Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang May, Thailand2,Center for Clinical Epidemiology
and Clinical Statistics, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University,
Chiang May, Thailand, 3Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang May, Thailand,
4Musculoskeletal Science and Translational Research (MSTR) Cluster,
Chiang Mai University, Chiang May, Thailand, 5Division of Pediatric
Surgery, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang May, Thailand
Objective: Ambulatory status restoration is an important therapeutic goal
for patients with intertrochanteric fractures. Several studies had identified
prognostic factors associated with functional endpoints after the
operation. We aimed to develop a practical tool for preoperative
prediction of good postoperative ambulatory status at 1-year for each
patient with intertrochanteric fracture.
Methods: We performed a secondary analysis of a retrospective cohort of
patients with intertrochanteric fractures who were operated on at Chiang
Mai University hospital between January 2017 and February 2020 to
derive clinical prediction models. Several factors were preselected as
candidates for model derivation, such as the patients’ sex, body mass
index, Charlson’s comorbidity index, and preinjury New Mobility
Score (NMS). Multivariable fractional polynomial (MFP) procedure with
logistic regression was used for statistical modeling.
Results: A total of 221 patients with intertrochanteric fractures were
included in the secondary analysis. Of these, 160 (72.4%) had good
postoperative ambulatory status (NMS ≥5) at 1-year. Male sex, body
mass index, Charlson’s comorbidity index, and preinjury NMS were
incorporated in the final logistic model. Only preinjury NMS was
transformed into second-degree fractional polynomial, while the rest were
fitted with linear terms. The final logistic model showed an acceptable
discriminative ability [AuROC of 0.77 (95%CI 0.70 to 0.85)] and model
calibration. For applicability, the model was presented as a user-friendly
mobile web application.
Conclusion: Our newly-derived clinical prediction tool showed
acceptable discrimination and calibration in predicting postoperative
ambulatory status at 1-year in patients with intertrochanteric fractures
using only four simple predictors. This tool would allow physicians to
provide patients and their families with individualized preoperative
predictions of postoperative ambulatory status. However, the model
should be further evaluated in an external dataset before being
implemented in practice.
Fig 1. Area under ROC of the developed model 
S409
Fig. 2 The web application interface of the predicting model
S410
Osteoporos Int (2022) 32 (Suppl 1):S119–S410
